{"-199": {"death": [], "event": ["The Roman general Gnaeus Baebius Tamphilus attacks the Insubres in Gaul, but loses over 6,700 soldiers in the process.", "Scipio Africanus becomes censor and princeps Senatus (the titular head of the Roman Senate).", "The Roman law, Lex Porcia, is proposed by the tribune P. Porcius Laeca to give Roman citizens in Italy and provinces the right of appeal in capital cases."], "birth": []}, "-198": {"death": [], "event": ["After his election to the consulship, Titus Quinctius Flamininus is chosen to replace Publius Sulpicius Galba Maximus as the leading Roman general in Macedonia. He then crosses into Macedonia with his army. Flamininus realizes that future peace depends on breaking the power of king Philip V of Macedon, not merely humbling him. He secures the backing of the Achaean League and then opens peace negotiations with Philip at Nicaea in Locris. Though peace proposals are submitted to the Roman Senate, the talks break down, and fighting resumes.", "Titus Quinctius Flamininus' forces manage to push Philip V out of most of Greece, except for a few fortresses. He then defeats Philip V in the Battle of the Aous, near modern Tepelen\u00eb in Albania.", "The Battle of Panium is fought between Seleucid forces led by Antiochus III and Ptolemaic forces led by Scopas of Aetolia. The Seleucids win the battle which allows Antiochus III to obtain entire possession of Palestine and Coele-Syria from King Ptolemy V of Egypt. Though the Romans send ambassadors to Ptolemy V, they are unable to lend him any serious assistance against Antiochus III.", "In the resulting peace, Antiochus III agrees to give his daughter Cleopatra in marriage to Ptolemy V.", "Following the defeat of the Han at the hands of the Xiongnu at Baideng in 200 BC, courtier Liu Jing[disambiguation needed\u00a0] (\u5289\u656c) is dispatched by Han emperor Gaozu for negotiations. The peace settlement eventually reached between the parties includes a Han princess given in marriage to the chanyu (called heqin \u548c\u89aa or \"harmonious kinship\"); periodic tribute of silk, liquor and rice to the Xiongnu; equal status between the states; and the Great Wall as mutual border. This treaty sets the pattern for relations between the Han and the Xiongnu for some sixty years."], "birth": []}, "-197": {"death": ["Attalus I Soter, ruler of Pergamum from 241 BC, who has taken on the title of king after about 230 BC. Through his military and diplomatic skills, he has created a powerful kingdom in Anatolia (b. 269 BC)"], "event": ["Eumenes II becomes King of Pergamum following the death of his father Attalus I Soter.", "Antiochus III occupies parts of the kingdom of Pergamum and a number of Greek cities in Anatolia.", "The Egyptian King, Ptolemy V, fights rebels in the Nile Delta, exhibiting great cruelty toward those of their leaders who capitulate.", "The Spartan ruler, Nabis, acquires the important city of Argos from Philip V of Macedon, as the price of his alliance with the Macedonians. Nabis then defects to the Romans in the expectation of being able to hold on to his conquest.", "The Battle of Cynoscephalae in Thessaly gives a Roman army under pro-consul Titus Quinctius Flamininus a decisive victory over Philip V of Macedon. In the Treaty of Tempe, the terms of the peace proposed by the Roman general and adopted by the Roman Senate specify that Philip V can retain his throne and control of Macedonia, but he has to abandon all the Greek cities he has conquered. Philip also has to provide to the Romans 1,000 talents as indemnity, surrender most of his fleet and provide hostages, including his younger son, Demetrius, who are to be held in Rome. The Aetolians propose that Philip V be ejected from his throne but Flamininus opposes this.", "Hispania is divided into Hispania Ulterior and Hispania Citerior."], "birth": []}, "-196": {"death": ["Han Xin, general who served under Emperor Gaozu of Han", "King Xin of Han, vassal ruler under Emperor Gaozu of Han"], "event": ["The Insubres, Gauls of the Po Valley, believed by the Romans to have been incited to revolt by Carthage, are finally defeated.", "A new category of Roman priests, the tresviri epulones, are elected to supervise the feasts of the gods; the first three men selected are Gaius Licinius Lucullus, Publius Manlius, and Publius Porcius Laeca.", "At the Isthmian Games at Corinth, the Roman general and pro-consul Titus Quinctius Flamininus proclaims that all Greeks are to be free and governed by their own laws. For this deed he is hailed in many Greek cities as a saviour and accorded homage alongside the gods.", "Flamininus accuses the Spartan ruler, Nabis, of tyranny, takes Gythium in Laconia and forces Nabis to surrender Argos.", "According to the Roman scholar and writer Marcus Terentius Varro, the foundation of a library at Pergamum around this time by Eumenes II of Pergamum, combined with an embargo on papyrus by Ptolemy V, leads to the invention of parchment.", "The Rosetta Stone is created. This stone is a Ptolemaic era stele written with the same text in two Egyptian language scripts (hieroglyphic and demotic) and in classical Greek. The translation of the Greek passage reveals that the inscription is a royal edict recording the benefits conferred on Egypt by the pharaoh Ptolemy V Epiphanes at the time of his coronation. This stone will provide the key to the hieroglyphic, or pictographic writing, of ancient Egypt and the decree on it reveals the increasing influence of Egyptian natives, remitted debts and taxes, released prisoners, pardoned rebels who have surrendered, and granted increased benefactions to the temples.", "Antiochus III's army crosses the Hellespont into Thrace, where he claims sovereignty over territory that has been won by Seleucus I in 281 BC. A war of harassment and diplomacy with Rome ensues. The Romans send ambassadors demanding that Antiochus stay out of Greece and set free all the autonomous communities in Anatolia. To meet these demands would have meant Antiochus III giving up the western part of his Seleucid Empire. Thus Antiochus refuses the Romans' demands."], "birth": []}, "-195": {"death": ["Gaozu of Han (or Gao), first Emperor of the Chinese Han Dynasty, who has ruled from 202 BC (b. 256 or 247 BC)"], "event": ["Because of his administrative and constitutional reforms in Carthage, Hannibal becomes unpopular with an important faction of the Carthaginian nobility and he is denounced to the Romans for inciting the Seleucid king Antiochus III to take up arms against the Romans. Rome demands that Carthage surrender Hannibal. However, Hannibal voluntarily goes into exile.", "Tensions between Antiochus III and Rome increase when Hannibal is given refuge by Antiochus III at Ephesus and becomes his adviser.", "After Roman diplomatic intervention, Antiochus III finally halts his war with Egypt. In the peace agreement (the Peace of Lysimachia), Antiochus III formally takes possession of southern Syria, which has been fought over for 100 years by the Ptolemies and Seleucids, and also takes possession of the Egyptian territories in Anatolia.", "A Spanish revolt against Roman consolidation of the ex-Carthaginian colonies is effectively put down by Marcus Porcius Cato (\"the Censor\"). He avoids one defeat by paying the Celtiberians 200 talents (around 120,000 denarii), a much-criticised tactic. On Cato's return to Rome, Aemilius Paulus succeeds him as Roman governor in Spain.", "The Roman sumptuary law, the Lex Oppia, which restricts not only a woman's wealth, but also her display of wealth, is repealed despite consul Marcus Porcius Cato's strong opposition.", "The Battle of Gythium is fought between Sparta and a coalition of Rome, Rhodes, the Achaean League and Pergamum. As the port of Gythium is an important Spartan base, the allies decide to capture it before they advance inland to Sparta. The Romans and the Acheans are joined outside the city by the Pergamese and Rhodian fleets. The Spartans hold out, however the pro-consul Titus Quinctius Flamininus arrives with 4,000 extra men. Facing too great an army, the Spartans decide to surrender the city on the condition that the garrison can leave unharmed. As a result, Nabis, the tyrant of Sparta, is forced to abandon the surrounding land and withdraw to the city of Sparta. Later that year, Sparta capitulates to the allies.", "Aristophanes of Byzantium, Greek scholar, critic and grammarian, becomes the chief librarian at Alexandria.", "Chang'an, the capital of China, is thought to become the largest city in the world at the time, taking over from Pataliputra, the capital of the Mauryan empire.[1]", "Haemosu Dangun, the first ruler of Buyeo, dies and his son Mosuri Dangun succeeds him to the throne."], "birth": ["Mithridates I (or Mithradates), \"Great King\" of Parthia from about 171 BC who will turn Parthia into a major political power and expand the empire westward into Mesopotamia (d. 138 BC)", "Terence or Publius Terentius Afer, Roman comic playwright (approximate date) (d. 159 BC)"]}, "-194": {"death": ["Eratosthenes, Greek mathematician, geographer and astronomer (b. 276 BC)", "Concubine Qi, also known as Lady Qi or Consort Qi, favoured concubine of Han Gaozu (personal name Liu Bang), the first emperor of the Chinese Han Dynasty"], "event": ["After checking the ambitions of the Spartan tyrant, Nabis, the Roman forces under pro-consul Titus Quinctius Flamininus finally withdraw from Greece.", "With the Roman legions under Flaminius returning to Italy, the Greek states are once again on their own. The Romans leave the dominant powers in the region; the kingdom of Macedonia, the Aetolians, the strengthened Achaean League and the weakened Sparta. The Aetolians, who have opposed the Roman intervention in Greek affairs, incite the Spartan leader, Nabis, to retake his former territories and regain his influence in Greek affairs.", "With his peace agreement with the Egyptians in place, Antiochus III now turns his attention to the West. He is encouraged to challenge Rome's protection of the Greeks by his advisor, the former Carthaginian general Hannibal.", "Philip V of Macedon, along with Rhodes, Pergamum, and the Achaean League, join Rome against Antiochus III.", "The Battle of Mutina is fought near Modena, between the Romans and the Gauls. The Romans are victorious in the battle which effectively ends the threat of the Gauls in Italy.", "The Italian towns of Liternum and Puteoli become Roman colonies.", "The construction of the first city wall of Chang'an begins.", "The Wiman Joseon kingdom of northern Korea (Choson) is founded by the Chinese Han Dynasty general Wiman."], "birth": []}, "-193": {"death": ["Xiao He, prime minister of the early Han Dynasty in China who has been a key figure in Liu Bang's rise to power after the fall of the Qin Dynasty"], "event": ["Eumenes II of Pergamum appeals to Rome for help against the Seleucid king Antiochus III who is threatening to conquer Greece. The Roman pro-consul Titus Quinctius Flamininus supports the Roman championship of Greek autonomy in Anatolia.", "Flamininus is sent to negotiate with Antiochus III and warns him not to interfere with the Greek states. Antiochus does not accept that Flamininus has the authority to speak for the Greeks and only promises to leave Greece alone only if the Romans do the same.", "Flamininus attempts to rally the Greeks against Antiochus III and to counter the pro-Seleucid policy of the Aetolians. When the Aetolians call on Antiochus III for aid, Flamininus persuades the Achaean League to declare war on both parties. He also prevents Philopoemen from taking Sparta.", "In the mean time, the Spartan ruler, Nabis, moves to recover lost territory, including Gythium.", "Carneades of Cyrene moves to Athens to found the third or new Academy.", "Cleopatra I Syra, daughter of Antiochus III and Laodice, marries the Egyptian King Ptolemy V Epiphanes."], "birth": []}, "-192": {"death": ["Nabis, tyrant and last independent ruler (from 207 BC) of Sparta"], "event": ["The Achaeans respond to Sparta's renewed interest in recovering lost territory by sending an envoy to Rome with a request for help. In response, the Roman Senate sends the praetor Atilius with a navy, as well as an embassy headed by Titus Quinctius Flamininus.", "Not waiting for the Roman fleet to arrive, the Achaean army and navy head towards Gythium under the command of Philopoemen. The Achaean fleet under Tiso is defeated by the Spartan fleet. On land, the Achaeans are unable to defeat the Spartan forces outside Gythium and Philopoemen retreats to Tegea.", "When Philopoemen reenters Laconia for a second attempt, his forces are ambushed by the Spartan tyrant, Nabis, but nevertheless Philopoemen manages to gain a victory over the Spartan forces.", "Philopoemen's plans for capturing Sparta itself are put on hold at the request of the Roman envoy Flaminius after his arrival in Greece. In return, Nabis decides, for the moment, to accept the status quo.", "Nabis then appeals to the Aetolians for help. They send 1,000 cavalry under the command of Alexamenus to Sparta. However, the Aetolians murder Nabis and temporarily occupy Sparta. The Aetolian troops seize the palace and set about looting the city, but the inhabitants of Sparta are able to rally and force them leave the city. Philopoemen, however, takes advantage of the Aetolian treachery and enters Sparta with his Achaean army. Now in full control of Sparta, Philopoemen forces Sparta to become a member state of the Achaean League.", "Seleucid forces under their king, Antiochus III, invade Greece at the invitation of the Aetolian League, who are revolting against the Romans. The Aetolians appoint him commander in chief of their league. Antiochus lands in Demetrias, Thessaly with only 10,500 men and occupies Euboea. However, he finds little support for his cause in central Greece."], "birth": []}, "-191": {"death": ["Arsaces II, King of Parthia, who has reigned from about 211 BC (murdered)"], "event": ["The Romans under Manius Acilius Glabrio and Cato the Elder cut the Seleucid king Antiochus III off from his reinforcements in Thrace and outflank his position at the pass of Thermopylae in the Battle of Thermopylae. With the remainder of his troops, Antiochus flees to Chalcis on Euboea and from there he retreats by sea to Ephesus.", "Manius Acilius Glabrio then turns his attention to the Aetolian League, which has persuaded Antiochus to declare war against Rome, and is only prevented from crushing them by the intercession of Titus Quinctius Flamininus.", "Scipio Africanus persuades the Roman Senate to continue the war against Antiochus III by making him the chief commander and allowing him and his brother, Lucius Cornelius Scipio Asiaticus, to follow Antiochus into Anatolia.", "The Roman calendar, which is four months ahead of the seasons, is adjusted (by Lex Acilia de intercalando).", "Cisalpine Gaul becomes a Roman province.", "The Carthaginians manage to collect the indemnity due to Rome (through the peace treaty signed between them ten years earlier) but not payable in full for 50 years. The Romans, in order to keep their hold on Carthage, refuse to accept the early payment of the indemnity.", "Arsaces II, king of Parthia, is considered to have been murdered on the orders of Antiochus III. Arsaces is succeeded by his cousin Phriapatius.", "Emperor Hui of Han lifts the ban on Confucian writings ordered in 213 BC."], "birth": []}, "-190": {"death": ["Apollonius of Perga, Greek mathematician, geometer and astronomer of the Alexandrian school, known by his contemporaries as \"The Great Geometer,\" whose treatise \"Conics\" is one of the greatest scientific works from the ancient world (b. c. 262 BC)"], "event": ["The Battle of the Eurymedon is fought between a Seleucid fleet and ships from Rhodes and Pergamum, who are allied with the Roman Republic. The Seleucids are led by the famous Carthaginian general Hannibal. The Rhodians and their allies are victorious and Hannibal's fleet is forced to flee.", "Subsequently, the naval Battle of Myonessus is fought between a Seleucid fleet and a Roman fleet with the help Rhodian ships. The Romans and their allies are victorious.", "As Philip V of Macedon has aided Rome against her enemies on the Greek peninsula, his tribute to Rome is remitted and his son, Demetrius, is restored to him after being held hostage in Rome for a number of years.", "Meeting no further resistance from the Seleucids and their allies, the Roman army under general Scipio Africanus and his brother Lucius, along with King Eumenes II of Pergamum and other allies, cross the Hellespont into Anatolia.", "With the increasingly real threat to his Empire from the Romans, Antiochus III is eager to negotiate on the basis of Rome's previous demands, but the Romans insist that he first give up the region west of the Taurus Mountains. When Antiochus refuses, the Battle of Magnesia is fought near Magnesia ad Sipylum, on the plains of Lydia in Anatolia, between the Romans, led by the consul Lucius Cornelius Scipio and his brother, Scipio Africanus, with their ally Eumenes II of Pergamum, and the army of Antiochus III the Great of the Seleucid Empire. The resulting decisive Roman victory ends the conflict with the Seleucids for the control of Greece.", "Following Antiochus III's defeat by the Romans, the two Armenian satraps of Antiochus III's, Artaxias and Zariadres, declare themselves independent of the Seleucids. With Roman consent, they establish themselves as kings of the Kingdom of Armenia and the district of Sophene (Armenia Minor), respectively. Artaxias builds his capital, Artaxata, on the Araxes River (now the Aras River) near Lake Sevan.", "For assisting the Romans in defeating Antiochus III, Eumenes II of Pergamum is rewarded with a great increase in territory. He is given control over the Thracian Chersonese (the modern Gallipoli peninsula) and over most of the former Seleucid possessions in Anatolia.", "One of the main highways in Roman Italy, the Via Appia, is extended to Benevento and Venosa.", "The statue Nike (Victory) of Samothrace is created (possible date). It is discovered in 1863 and is now kept at Mus\u00e9e du Louvre in Paris."], "birth": ["Hipparchus, Greek astronomer, geographer, and mathematician (d. c. 120 BC)", "Cornelia Scipionis Africana, second daughter of Publius Cornelius Scipio Africanus and Aemilia Paulla. She will be considered by Roman society to be the perfect example of a virtuous Roman woman (d. 100 BC)"]}, "-189": {"death": ["Zhang Liang, Chinese rebel and taoist, who has helped Liu Bang establish the Han Dynasty"], "event": ["Cato the Elder criticizes the consul Marcus Fulvius Nobilior for giving awards to Roman soldiers for doing ordinary tasks such as digging wells.", "The defeat of Antiochus III by the Romans in the Battle of Magnesia robs the Aetolian League of its principal foreign ally and makes it impossible for them to stand alone in continued opposition to Rome. The League is forced to sign a peace treaty with Rome that makes it a subject ally of the Republic. Although the League continues to exist in name, the power of the League is broken by the treaty and it never again constitutes a significant political or military force.", "The Romans under consul Gnaeus Manlius Vulso, along with a Pergamene army under Eumenes II, defeat the Galatians in Anatolia and make them subjects of Pergamum.", "The city of Philadelphia (now Ala\u015fehir, Turkey) is founded by King Eumenes II of Pergamon. Eumenes names the city after his brother, Attalus, whose loyalty earns him the nickname, \"Philadelphus\", literally meaning \"one who loves his brother\"."], "birth": []}, "-188": {"death": ["Hui of Han, the second emperor of the Chinese Han Dynasty, who has ruled from 195 BC (b. 210 BC)"], "event": ["The leader of the Achaean League, Philopoemen, enters northern Laconia with his army and a group of Spartan exiles. His army demolishes the wall that the former tyrant of Sparta, Nabis, has built around Sparta. Philopoemen then restores Spartan citizenship to the exiles and abolishes Spartan law, introducing Achaean law in its place. Sparta's role as a major power in Greece ends, while the Achaean League becomes the dominant power throughout the Peloponnese.", "The continuing quarrels among the Greek cities and leagues increases the conviction in Rome that there will be no peace in Greece until Rome takes full control.", "Through the peace treaty of Apamea (in Phrygia), the Romans force the Seleucid king, Antiochus III, to surrender all his Greek and Anatolian possessions as far east as the Taurus Mountains, to pay 15,000 talents over a period of 12 years and to surrender to Rome the former Carthaginian general Hannibal, his elephants and his fleet, and furnish hostages, including the king's eldest son, Demetrius. Rome is now the master of the eastern Mediterranean while Antiochus III's empire is reduced to Syria, Mesopotamia, and western Iran.", "Hannibal flees via Crete to the court of King Prusias I of Bithynia who is engaged in warfare with Rome's ally, King Eumenes II of Pergamum.", "Following the peace of Apamea, Eumenes II receives the provinces of Phrygia, Lydia, Lycia, Pisidia, and Pamphylia from his Roman allies, as the Romans have no desire to actually administer territory in Hellenistic Anatolia but want to see a strong, friendly state in Anatolia as a buffer zone against any possible Seleucid expansion in the future."], "birth": ["Jing of Han, emperor of the Chinese Han Dynasty, who will rule from 156 BC. During his reign, he will fight to curtail of power of the Chinese feudal princes (d. 141 BC)"]}, "-187": {"death": ["Antiochus III the Great, Seleucid king of the Hellenistic Syrian Empire from 223 BC, who has rebuilt the empire in the East but failed in his attempt to challenge Roman ascendancy in Greece and Anatolia (b. c. 241 BC)"], "event": ["The Seleucid king, Antiochus III, mounts a fresh expedition to the east of his kingdom in Luristan, where he is killed during an attempt to collect tribute from a temple at Elymais, Persia. He is succeeded by his son, Seleucus IV, who inherits an empire consisting of Syria (including Cilicia and Palestine), Mesopotamia, Babylonia, Media and Persia.", "Tiberius Gracchus Major is elected tribune of the plebs, in which capacity he is recorded as having saved Publius Cornelius Scipio Africanus Major from prosecution by interposing his veto. Tiberius is no friend nor political ally of Scipio's, but feels that the general's services to Rome merit his release from the threat of trial like any common criminal. Supposedly, in gratitude for this action, Scipio betrothes his youngest daughter, Cornelia, to him.", "The construction of the Via Aemilia, a trunk road in the north Italian plains, running from Ariminum (Rimini), on the Adriatic coast, to Placentia (Piacenza) on the river Padus (Po), is completed.", "Queen Cleopatra I is appointed Vizier (Chief Minister) to the King Ptolemy V Epiphanes."], "birth": []}, "-186": {"death": ["Li Cang, Marquis of Dai, buried in one of the tombs at Mawangdui"], "event": ["The rapid spread of the Bacchanalia cult throughout the Roman Republic, which, it is claimed, indulges in all kinds of crimes and political conspiracies at its nocturnal meetings, leads to the Roman Senate issuing a decree, the Senatus consultum de Bacchanalibus, by which the Bacchanalia are prohibited throughout all Italy except in certain special cases which must be approved specifically by the Senate.", "Eumenes II of Pergamum defeats Prusias I of Bithynia.", "The first burial at the famous archaeological site of Mawangdui is made during the Western Han Dynasty of China."], "birth": ["Ptolemy VI Philometor, king of Egypt, who will reign from 180 BC (d. 145 BC)"]}, "-185": {"death": ["Brhadrata, Indian emperor, last ruler of the Indian Mauryan dynasty (from 197 BC)"], "event": ["The Roman general Scipio Africanus and his brother Lucius are accused by Cato the Elder and his supporters of having received bribes from the late Seleucid king Antiochus III. Scipio defies his accusers, reminds the Romans of their debt to him, and retires to his country house at Liternum in Campania. However, Cato is successful in breaking the political influence of Lucius Scipio and Scipio Africanus.", "The civil war between the northern and southern areas of Egypt ends with the arrest of Ankmachis by the Ptolemaic general Conanus.", "Pusyamitra Sunga assassinates the Mauryan emperor Brhadrata, which brings an end to that dynasty, after which he founds the Sunga dynasty."], "birth": ["Publius Cornelius Scipio Aemilianus, leading general and politician of the Roman Republic. As consul he will be the commander of the final siege and destruction of Carthage and will be the leader of the senators opposed to the Gracchi (d. 129 BC)", "Panaetius of Rhodes, Greek philosopher (d. 110 BC)"]}, "-184": {"death": ["Titus Macchius Plautus, Roman comic dramatist, whose works, loosely adapted from Greek plays, established a truly Roman drama in the Latin language (b. c. 254 BC)", "Liu Gong, third emperor of the Chinese Han Dynasty"], "event": ["Cato the Elder, along with his colleague, Lucius Valerius Flaccus, is elected censors in Rome. Already the champion of the ancient, austere Roman way of life, Cato, now inaugurates a puritanical campaign. He aims at preserving the mos majorum (\"ancestral custom\") and combating all Greek influences, which he believes are undermining the older Roman standards of morality. He passes measures taxing luxury and strictly revises the list of persons eligible for the Senate. Abuses by tax gatherers are brought under control, and public building is promoted as a worthy cause.", "With concerns rising in Rome over whether Philip V of Macedon is preparing for a new war with the Romans, Appius Claudius Pulcher is sent at the head of an embassy into Macedonia and Greece to observe Philip's activities.", "The town of Pisaurum is established by the Romans as a colony in the territory of the Piceni, a tribe living in the Marche on the Adriatic.", "The oldest known basilica, the Basilica Porcia, is completed in Rome by Cato the Elder during the time he is censor. The building is used by the Romans for transacting business and disposing of legal matters."], "birth": []}, "-183": {"death": ["Publius Cornelius Scipio Africanus Major, Roman statesman and general, famous for his victory over the Carthaginian leader Hannibal in the Battle of Zama in 202 BC, which has ended the Second Punic War and given him the surname Africanus (b. 236 BC)", "Philopoemen, Greek general and statesman, strategos of the Achaean League on eight occasions and a major figure in the demise of Sparta as a Greek power (b. 253 BC)", "Hannibal, Carthaginian statesman, military commander and tactician, one of history's great military leaders, who has commanded the Carthaginian forces against Rome in the Second Punic War (b. 247 BC)"], "event": ["Roman colonies are established at Mutina (later Modena), Pisa and Parma in northern and central Italy.", "The Roman general Scipio Africanus dies at Liternum in Campania.", "The Roman statesman Titus Quinctius Flamininus is sent to the court of Prusias I, king of Bithynia, to demand the surrender of the former Carthaginian statesman and general Hannibal. When Hannibal finds out that Prusias is about to agree to the Roman demands and thus betray him, he poisons himself in the village of Libyssa in Bithynia.", "The town of Messene rebels against the Achaean League. When the Achaean League's general, Philopoemen, intervenes to try to control the rebellion, he is captured during a skirmish and imprisoned. He is then given poison to take so that he can die honourably."], "birth": ["Publius Cornelius Scipio Nasica Serapio, consul in 138 BC, who will have a prominent part in the murder of Tiberius Gracchus by leading a group of conservative senators and other knights in opposition to Gracchus and his supporters (d. 132 BC)"]}, "-182": {"death": ["Prusias I Chlorus, king of Bithynia (b. c. 228 BC)"], "event": ["The king of Bithynia, Prusias I Chlorus dies and is succeeded by his son, who rules as Prusias II."], "birth": ["Ptolemy VIII Euergetes II, king of the Ptolemaic dynasty in Egypt (d. 116 BC)"]}, "-181": {"death": ["Ptolemy V Epiphanes, Ptolemaic dynasty ruler of Egypt who has reigned from 204 BC"], "event": ["Ptolemy V is poisoned after a reign of 24 years in which the Egyptian kingdom has declined in power and influence and has lost most of its empire outside Egypt other than Cyprus and Cyrenaica. The elder of his two sons, Ptolemy VI Philometor succeeds him, but since he is an infant, he rules under the regency of his mother Cleopatra the Syrian.", "Rome founds a colony at Aquileia, on the narrow strip of land between the mountains and the lagoons, as a frontier fortress to check the advance of the Illyrians.", "Pharnaces I of Pontus decides to attack both Eumenes II of Pergamum and Ariarathes IV of Cappadocia and therefore invades Galatia with a large force. Eumenes leads an army to oppose him, however, hostilities are soon suspended following the arrival of Roman deputies, who have been appointed by the Roman Senate to inquire into the matters in dispute. Negotiations take place at Pergamum but are inconclusive, with Pharnaces' demands being rejected by the Romans as unreasonable. As a consequence, the war between Pontus and Pergamum and Cappadocia is renewed."], "birth": []}, "-180": {"death": ["Lucius Valerius Flaccus, Roman statesman, consul in 195 BC, censor in 183 BC and colleague of Cato the Elder", "Aristophanes of Byzantium, Greek scholar, critic and grammarian, particularly renowned for his work in Homeric scholarship, but also for work on other classical authors such as Pindar and Hesiod. After early studies under leading scholars in Alexandria, he has been chief librarian since about 195 BC (b. 257 BC)", "Empress Dowager L\u00fc, de facto ruler of the Chinese Han dynasty and wife of Emperor Gao", "Liu Hong, fourth emperor of the Chinese Han Dynasty"], "event": ["After three years of intriguing against his younger brother Demetrius, including accusing him of coveting the succession to the Macedonian throne and being allied to Rome, Perseus persuades his father King Philip V of Macedon to have Demetrius executed.", "Rome completes its subjugation of all of Italy with the defeat of the Ligurians in a battle near modern Genoa. Rome deports 40,000 Ligurians to other areas of the Republic.", "Lucca becomes a Roman colony.", "Ptolemy VI Philometor, aged 6, rules as co-regent with his mother, Cleopatra I, who, although a daughter of a Seleucid king, does not take King Seleucus IV's side and remains on friendly terms with Rome.", "Following the death of Aristophanes of Byzantium, Aristarchus of Samothrace becomes librarian at Alexandria.", "Demetrius I starts his invasion of present-day Pakistan, following the earlier destruction of the Mauryan dynasty by general Pusyamitra Sunga.", "Apollodotus I, a general with Demetrius I of Bactria, becomes king of the western and southern parts of the Indo-Greek kingdom, from Taxila in Punjab to the areas of Sindh and possibly Gujarat. He maintains his allegiance to Demetrius I.", "Emperor Wen of the Han dynasty ascends to the Chinese throne after quelling the clans of Empress Dowager L\u00fc."], "birth": ["Apollodorus of Athens, Greek scholar and grammarian (d. c. 120 BC)", "Viriathus, Lusitanian chieftain and general (d. 139 BC)"]}, "-179": {"death": ["Philip V, king of Macedonia from 221 BC, whose attempt to extend Macedonian influence throughout Greece has occurred at a time of growing Roman involvement in Greek affairs and resulted in his military defeat by Rome (b. 238 BC)", "Liu Xiang, Chinese prince involved in the L\u00fc Clan Disturbance in 180 BC and grandson of Emperor Gao of Han"], "event": ["Tiberius Gracchus Major goes to Hispania as Roman governor to deal with uprisings there.", "The Pons Aemilius is completed across the Tiber River in Rome. It is regarded as the world's first stone bridge.", "Marcus Aemilius Lepidus is appointed both censor and princeps senatus.", "Philip V of Macedon dies at Amphipolis in Macedonia, remorseful for having put his younger son Demetrius to death, at the instigation of his older son Perseus. Nevertheless, he is succeeded by his son Perseus.", "Eumenes II of Pergamum defeats Pharnaces I of Pontus in a major battle. Finding himself unable to cope with the combined forces of Eumenes and Ariarathes IV of Cappadocia, Pharnaces is compelled to purchase peace by ceding all his conquests in Galatia and Paphlagonia, with the exception of Sinope."], "birth": ["Liu An, Chinese prince, geographer, and cartographer (d. 122 BC)", "Sima Xiangru, Chinese statesman, poet, and musician (d. 117 BC)", "Dong Zhongshu, Chinese scholar who is traditionally associated with the promotion of Confucianism as the official ideology of the Chinese imperial state (d. 104 BC)"]}, "-178": {"death": [], "event": ["In Rome, the praetor Lucius Postumius Albinus celebrates a triumph after conquering the Vaccaei and Lusitani during his time as Roman commander in the province of Hispania Ulterior.", "One of Perseus' first acts on becoming king of Macedonia is to renew the treaty between Macedonia and Rome. In the mean time, Perseus builds up the Macedonian army and puts out feelers for creating an alliance with the Greek leagues, with his northern barbarian neighbours, and also with the Seleucid king Seleucus IV."], "birth": []}, "-177": {"death": ["Liu Xingju, Chinese prince of the Han Dynasty and a key player during the L\u00fc Clan Disturbance (180 BC), grandson of Emperor Gao of Han and son of Prince Liu Fei of Qi", "Liu Zhang, Chinese prince of the Han Dynasty and a key figure in the anti-L\u00fc clan conspiracy during the L\u00fc Clan Disturbance of 180 BC"], "event": ["Perseus of Macedonia marries Laodice, the daughter of the Seleucid king Seleucus IV.", "After two military campaigns, the Romans finally subdue the Illyrian tribe of the Histri.", "Luni in northern Italy is founded by the Romans with the name Luna at the mouth of the Magra River."], "birth": []}, "-176": {"death": ["Cleopatra I Syra, queen of Egypt from 193 BC, wife of Ptolemy V Epiphanes and regent for her young son, Ptolemy VI Philometor (b. c. 204 BC)", "Phriapatius, king of Parthia"], "event": ["The Roman general, Tiberius Gracchus Major, subdues Sardinia, enslaving some of the population.", "Cleopatra I Syra dies leaving her son, Ptolemy VI, to rule Egypt alone.", "King Phriapatius of Parthia dies and is succeeded by his son Phraates I."], "birth": []}, "-175": {"death": ["Seleucus IV Philopator, king of the Seleucid dynasty, who has ruled from 187 BC (b. c. 217 BC)"], "event": ["King Seleucus IV of Syria arranges for the exchange of his brother Antiochus for Demetrius, the son of Seleucus VI, who has been a hostage in Rome following the Treaty of Apamea in 188 BC. However, Seleucus IV is assassinated by his chief minister Heliodorus who then seizes the Syrian throne.", "Antiochus manages to oust Heliodorus and takes advantage of Demetrius' captivity in Rome to seize the throne for himself under the name Antiochus IV Epiphanes.", "During this period of uncertainty in Syria, the Egyptian ruler, Ptolemy VI, lays claim to Coele Syria, Palestine, and Phoenicia, which the Seleucid king Antiochus III has previously conquered. Both the Syrian and Egyptian parties appeal to Rome for help, but the Roman Senate refuses to take sides.", "Timarchus is appointed governor of Media in western Persia by Antiochus IV to deal with the growing threat from the Parthians while Timarchus' brother, Heracleides, becomes minister of the royal finances.", "The construction of the western front of the altar in Pergamum, Turkey begins (approximate date) and is finished in 156 BC. A reconstruction of it is now kept at the Staatliche Museen zu Berlin, Preussischer Kulturbesitz, Pergamonmuseum in Berlin."], "birth": []}, "-174": {"death": ["Titus Quinctius Flamininus, Roman general and statesman whose skillful diplomacy has enabled him to establish a Roman protectorate over Greece (b. c. 227 BC) (approximate date)", "Publius Aelius Paetus, Roman consul and censor", "Mete Khan, emperor and founder of the Xiongnu Empire, who has united various Hun confederations under his rule (b. 234 BC)"], "event": ["The Xiongnu attack the Tocharians, and force them away from Gansu."], "birth": []}, "-173": {"death": ["Lucius Cornelius Lentulus, consul of the Roman Republic"], "event": ["Ptolemy VI Philometor marries his sister, Cleopatra II.", "Antiochus IV pays the remainder of the war indemnity that has been imposed by the Romans on Antiochus III in the Treaty of Apamea (188 BC)."], "birth": ["Antiochus V Eupator, ruler of the Seleucid Empire from 164 BC (d. 162 BC)"]}, "-172": {"death": [], "event": ["Eumenes II of Pergamum travels to Rome to warn the Roman Senate of the danger from Perseus of Macedon. On his return from Rome, Eumenes II is nearly killed at Delphi and Perseus is suspected of being the instigator.", "Since the reign of the Seleucid king, Antiochus III, the Jewish inhabitants of Judea enjoy extensive autonomy under their high priest. However, they are divided into two parties, the orthodox Hasideans (Pious Ones) and a reform party that favours Hellenism. Antiochus IV supports the reform party because of the financial support they provide him with. In return for a considerable payment, he has permitted the high priest, Jason, to build a gymnasium in Jerusalem and to introduce the Greek mode of educating young people. Jason's time as high priest is brought to an abrupt end when he sends Menelaus, the brother of Simon the Benjamite, to deliver money to Antiochus IV. Menelaus takes this opportunity to \"outbid\" Jason for the priesthood, resulting in Antiochus IV confirming Menelaus as the High Priest.", "The peace treaty at the end of the Second Punic War requires that all border disputes involving Carthage be arbitrated by the Roman Senate and requires Carthage to get explicit Roman approval before going to war. As a result, envoys from Carthage appear before the Roman Senate to request resolution of a boundary dispute with Numidia. The dispute is decided in Numidia's favour."], "birth": []}, "-171": {"death": ["Phraates I, King of Parthia, who has ruled the country since 176 BC"], "event": ["Epirus joins Macedonia in the latter's fight against Rome. However, the Greek leagues remain neutral.", "Thanks to the efforts of Eumenes II of Pergamum while in Rome, the Romans declare war on Macedonia and send troops to Thessaly, thus beginning the Third Macedonian War. In the resulting Battle of Callicinus the Macedonians, led by their king, Perseus, are victorious over a Roman force led by consul Publius Licinius Crassus.", "The first Roman colony outside Italy is founded at Carteia in southern Hispania after Iberian-born descendants of Roman soldiers appear before the Roman Senate to request a town to live in and are given Carteia, which is named Colonia Libertinorum Carteia.", "Lucius Postumius Albinus is sent by Rome as an ambassador to King Masinissa of Numidia, and to the Carthaginians in order to raise troops for the war against Perseus of Macedonia.", "Mithradates I succeeds his brother Phraates I as king of Parthia."], "birth": []}, "-170": {"death": [], "event": ["In Thessaly, King Perseus of Macedon repulses a Roman army which is commanded by Aulus Hostilius Mancinus. Meanwhile, the Thracian city of Abdera is sacked by Roman and Pergamese troops.", "With the guardians of the young king Ptolemy VI Philometor demanding the return of Coele-Syria to Egyptian control, the Seleucid king, Antiochus IV Epiphanes, decides on a preemptive strike against Egypt and invades the country, conquering all but the city of Alexandria. He is also able to capture Ptolemy VI.", "Antiochus IV decides to let Ptolemy VI continue as king of Egypt, but as his puppet. He does this to minimise any reaction from Rome towards his invasion. Antiochus IV then departs Egypt to deal with disturbances in Palestine, but he safeguards his access to Egypt with a strong garrison in Pelusium.", "With Antiochus IV now absent from the country, the citizens of Alexandria choose Ptolemy VI's brother Ptolemy VIII Euergetes II as their king. The two Ptolemy brothers agree to rule Egypt jointly with their sister Cleopatra II and Coele Syria is invaded by the Egyptian forces.", "The usurped high priest of Judea, Jason, does not abandon his claims to being the high priest which he has lost to Menelaus two years earlier. While Antiochus IV is waging war against Egypt, he succeeds in making himself master of Jerusalem once more and forces Menelaus to seek refuge in the citadel.", "Around this time, Eucratides, who is either a rebellious Bactrian official or a cousin of the Seleucid king Antiochus IV Epiphanes, captures the throne of the Greco-Bactrian Kingdom by toppling the Euthydemid dynasty's king Antimachus I."], "birth": ["Dionysios Thrax, a Hellenic grammarian who will live and work in Alexandria and later on Rhodes (d. 90 BC)", "Lucius Accius (or Lucius Attius), Roman tragic poet and literary scholar (d. c. 86 BC)"]}, "-169": {"death": ["Quintus Ennius (b. 239 BC), epic poet, dramatist, and satirist, the most influential of the early Latin poets, and often called the founder of Roman literature or the father of Roman poetry. His epic Annales, a narrative poem telling the story of Rome from the wanderings of Aeneas to the Ennius' own time, remains the national epic until it is later eclipsed by Virgil's Aeneid"], "event": ["Macedonian forces led by Perseus of Macedon trap a Roman army led by consul Quintus Marcius Phillipus near Tempe, but the Macedonians fail to take advantage of their resulting superior tactical position.", "King Perseus asks the Seleucid King Antiochus IV to join forces with him against the danger that Rome presents to all of the Hellenic monarchs. Antiochus IV does not respond.", "Lex Voconia (The Voconian Law) is introduced in Rome by the tribune, Quintus Voconius Saxa, with the support of Cato the Elder. This law prohibits those who own property valued at 100,000 sesterces from making a woman their heir."], "birth": []}, "-168": {"death": ["Caecilius Statius, Roman comic poet, admirer and imitator of the Greek playwright Menander (b. c. 219 BC)", "Jia Yi, Chinese statesman and poet (b. 200 BC)"], "event": ["The king of Illyria, Gentius, is defeated at Scodra by a Roman force under Lucius Anicius Gallus and then brought to Rome as a captive to be interned in Iguvium. This loss removes Illyria as an important ally for Macedonia and effectively weakens Perseus of Macedon in his battle with Rome.", "The Roman general, Lucius Aemilius Paulus, is elected consul and arrives in Thessaly to lead the Roman army which has been trapped by Perseus' forces.", "June 22 \u2013 The Battle of Pydna (in southern Macedonia) gives Roman forces under Lucius Aemilius Paulus a crushing victory over Perseus and his Macedonian forces, thus ending the Third Macedonian War. Perseus is captured by the Romans and will spend the rest of his life in captivity at Alba Fucens, near Rome.", "The Macedonian kingdom is broken up by the Romans into four smaller states, and all the Greek cities which have offered aid to Macedonia, even just in words, are punished. The Romans take hundreds of prisoners from the leading families of Macedonia, including the historian Polybius.", "The joint rulers of Egypt, Ptolemy VI, Ptolemy VIII Euergetes II and their sister Cleopatra II send a renewed request to Rome for aid.", "The fleet of the Seleucid king Antiochus IV wins a victory off Cyprus, whose governor then surrenders the island to him.", "Antiochus IV then invades Egypt again and occupies Lower Egypt and his forces camp outside Alexandria. However, the Roman ambassador in Alexandria, Gaius Popillius Laenas, intervenes. He presents Antiochus IV with an ultimatum that he evacuate Egypt and Cyprus immediately. Antiochus, taken by surprise, asks for time to consider. Popillius, however, draws a circle in the earth (i.e. \"a line in the sand\") around the king with his walking stick and demands an unequivocal answer before Antiochus leaves the circle. Fearing the consequences of a war with Rome, the king agrees to comply with the ambassador's demands. In return, the Romans agree that Antiochus IV can retain southern Syria, to which Egypt has laid claim, thus enabling Antiochus IV to preserve the territorial integrity of his realm.", "Jason removes Menelaus as High Priest in Jerusalem, which Antiochus IV regards as an affront to his majesty."], "birth": ["Tiberius Sempronius Gracchus, Roman politician who would create turmoil in the Republic through his attempts to legislate agrarian reforms in the Roman Republic (d. 133 BC)"]}, "-167": {"death": ["Gaius Claudius Pulcher, Roman consul in 177 BC"], "event": ["King Antiochus IV Epiphanes, believing Judea to be in revolt, returns to there after the failure of his Egyptian campaign and orders his soldiers to cut down without mercy those whom they meet and to slay those who have taken refuge in their houses. In the space of three days, 80,000 are lost in Jerusalem, 40,000 meeting a violent death, and the same number being sold into slavery.[1]", "The Jewish priest Mattathias of Modi'in defies the king Antiochus IV's decrees aimed at hellenizing the Jews and specifically defies the order that Jews should sacrifice to Zeus. Mattathias slays a Syrian official and escapes into the Judean hills with his five sons and begins a revolt against Seleucid control of Judea.", "Private documents collected by the Romans when they capture Perseus of Macedon incriminate political leaders of the Achaean League. Many influential Greeks are deported to Rome.", "On his way back to Rome, the Roman general Lucius Aemilius Paulus is ordered by the Roman Senate to inflict a brutal revenge on Epirus for being an ally of Macedonia. Seventy towns in Epirus are destroyed and at least 100,000 citizens are sold into slavery. These actions take place despite the fact that Epirus has not aided Perseus in his war with Rome.", "Lucius Aemilius Paulus returns to Italy with the King of Macedonia, Perseus, as his prisoner for his triumphal procession in Rome, where the Macedonians captured are sold into slavery. The huge amount of booty brought home after the battle enriches Rome allowing the Government to relieve her citizens of direct taxation. As a gesture of acknowledgment for his achievements in Macedonia, the senate awards Lucius Aemilius Paulus the surname Macedonicus.", "The Parthians capture the key central Asian city of Herat. This victory effectively chokes off the movement of trade along the Silk Road to China and means that the Hellenic kingdom of Bactria is doomed."], "birth": []}, "-166": {"death": ["Mattathias, father of Judas Maccabaeus, Jewish priest from Modi'in, near Jerusalem, who has started and briefly led a rebellion by the Jews in Judea against the Seleucid kingdom of Syria", "Perseus, the last Macedonian king of the Antigonid dynasty (b. c. 212 BC)"], "event": ["The Seleucid king Antiochus IV mounts a campaign against the Parthians who are threatening his empire in the east. He leaves his chancellor, Lysias, with responsibility for the government of southern Syria and the guardianship of his son.", "The leader of the Jewish revolt against Syria rule, Mattathias, dies and his third son, Judas, assumes leadership of the revolt in accordance with the deathbed disposition of his father.", "The Battle of Beth Horon is fought between Jewish forces led by Judas Maccabeus and a Seleucid army. Maccabeus gains the element of surprise and successfully routs the much larger Syrian army.", "The Battle of Emmaus takes place between the Jewish rebels led by Judas Maccabeus and Seleucid forces sent by Antiochus IV and led by Lysias and his general, Gorgias. In the ensuing battle, Judas Maccabeus and his men succeed in repelling Gorgias and forcing his army out of Judea and down to the coastal plain in what is an important victory in the war for Judea's independence.", "The Roman playwright Terence's Andria (The Girl from Andros) is first performed at the Megalesian games.", "Laoshang leads 140,000 Xiongnu cavalry in a raid in Anding, and they reach as far as the royal retreat at Yong."], "birth": []}, "-165": {"death": ["Perseus, the last king of Macedonia, who has ruled from 179 BC to 168 BC and whose attempts to dominate Greece has brought on the final defeat of Macedonia by the Romans, leading to the Roman annexation of the region (b. c. 212 BC)"], "event": ["Artaxias I, King of Armenia, is taken captive by the Seleucid king Antiochus IV Epiphanes when he attacks Armenia. Artaxias is forced to recognize Antiochus IV's suzerainty over Armenia before he is released.", "The Roman playwright Terence's Hecyra (The Mother-in-Law) is first performed."], "birth": []}, "-164": {"death": ["Antiochus IV Epiphanes (\"God Manifest\"), Seleucid king of the Syrian kingdom who has reigned since 175 BC, and has encouraged Greek culture and institutions but also attempted to suppress Judaism, which has led to the uprisings in Judea towards the end of his reign (b. c. 215 BC)"], "event": ["The Egyptian King Ptolemy VI Philometor is expelled from Alexandria by his brother Ptolemy VIII Euergetes and flees to Rome to seek support.", "The Seleucid king Antiochus IV Epiphanes dies while on a campaign in Tabae (or Gabae, now Isfahan) in Persia. He is succeeded by his son Antiochus V Eupator who is only nine years old. The regent for the boy is the late king's chancellor, Lysias, who has been left in charge of Syria when Antiochus IV departed for his campaign in Persia. Lysias is, however, seriously challenged by other Syrian generals and finds himself with a precarious hold on power. To make matters worse for him, the Roman Senate is holding Demetrius, the son of the former king Seleucus IV and, therefore, the rightful heir to the Seleucid throne, as a hostage. By threatening to release him, the Senate is able to influence events in the Seleucid kingdom.", "The Battle of Beth Zur is fought between Jewish rebel forces led by Judas Maccabeus and a Seleucid army led by the regent Lysias. Judas Maccabeus wins the battle and is able to recapture Jerusalem soon after. Judas purifies the defiled Temple in Jerusalem, destroys the idols erected there by Antiochus IV and restores the service in the Temple. The reconsecration of the Temple becomes an annual feast of dedication in the Jewish calendar, Hanukkah.", "Rhodes signs a treaty with Rome and becomes its ally.", "Lucius Aemilius Paullus Macedonicus is elected censor in Rome.", "Construction of the detail of the frieze from the east front of the altar in Pergamon, Athena Attacking the Giants, begins and is finished eight years later. It is now kept at the Staatliche Museen zu Berlin, Antikensammlung, Pergamonmuseum in Berlin, Germany."], "birth": ["Cleopatra Thea Euergetis (\"Benefactress\"), ruler of the Seleucid kingdom from 125 BC, a daughter of Ptolemy VI of Egypt and his sister/wife Cleopatra II (d. 121 BC) (approximate date)"]}, "-163": {"death": ["Zhang Yan, known formally as Empress Xiaohui, empress of the Chinese Han Dynasty"], "event": ["The Egyptian king Ptolemy VI Philometor is restored to his throne through the intervention of the citizens of Alexandria. However, the Romans intervene and decide to partition the Ptolemaic realm, ordering Ptolemy VIII Euergetes into Cyrenaica and giving Ptolemy VI Cyprus and Egypt. The two brothers accept the Roman partition.", "In the turmoil following the death of Antiochus IV, the governor of Media, Timarchus becomes the independent ruler of Media, opposing Lysias who is acting as regent for young king Antiochus V Eupator.", "Lysias tries to make peace with the Jews in Judea. He offers them full religious freedom if they will lay down their arms. Even though the Chasidim consent, Judas Maccabeus argues for full political as well as religious freedom.", "The Roman playwright Terence's play Heauton Timorumenos (\"The Self-Tormentor\") is first performed.[1]"], "birth": ["Tiberius Sempronius Gracchus, Roman politician, who, as a plebeian tribune, will cause political turmoil in the Republic through his attempts to legislate agrarian reforms; his political ideals will eventually lead to his death at the hands of supporters of the conservative faction (Optimates) of the Roman Senate (d. 132 BC)", "Marcus Aemilius Scaurus, Roman politician and ambassador (d. 89 BC)"]}, "-162": {"death": ["Antiochus V Eupator, ruler of the Seleucid Empire, who has reigned from 164 BC (b. c. 173 BC)", "Lysias or Lusias, Seleucid general and governor of Syria and regent for Antiochus V Eupator", "Saurmag I, king of Caucasian Iberia"], "event": ["The Maccabees, under the leadership of Judas Maccabeus, continue their struggle against the Seleucids and persecute the Hellenising faction in Judea.", "Seleucid forces still control the Acra, a strong fortress within Jerusalem that faces the Temple Mount. Judas Maccabeus lays siege to the fortress and in response, the Seleucid general and regent to the young Seleucid king Antiochus V, Lysias, approaches Jerusalem and besieges Beth-zechariah, 25 kilometres from the city. Judas lifts his own siege on the Acra, and leads his army south to Beth-zechariah. In the ensuing Battle of Beth-zechariah, the Seleucids achieve their first major victory over the Maccabees, and Judas is forced to withdraw to Jerusalem.", "Lysias then lays siege to the city. Just when capitulation by the Maccabees seems imminent, Lysias has to withdraw when the commander-in-chief under the late Seleucid king Antiochus IV Epiphanes, Philip, rebels against him. As a result, Lysias decides to propose a peaceful settlement which is accepted by the Maccabees. The terms of peace involve the restoration of religious freedom, permission for the Jews to live in accordance with their own laws, and the official return of the Temple in Jerusalem to the Jews.", "With the aid of the Greek statesman and historian Polybius, the son of the former Seleucid king Seleucus IV Philopator, Demetrius escapes from Rome, where he has been held as a hostage for many years, and returns to Syria to claim the throne from his nephew Antiochus V. In the resulting dispute, Antiochus V and his regent, Lysias, are overthrown and put to death. Demetrius then establishes himself on the Seleucid throne.", "The king of Caucasian Iberia, Saurmag I, dies. Having no son, he is succeeded by his son-in-law, Mirian."], "birth": []}, "-161": {"death": ["Nicanor, Seleucid general"], "event": ["The rebel Seleucid general and ruler of Media, Timarchus, who has distinguished himself by defending Media against the emergent Parthians, treats Demetrius I's violent accession to the Seleucid throne as the excuse to declare himself an independent king and extend his realm from Media into Babylonia.", "With the restoration of peace in Judea, an internal struggle breaks out between the supporters of Judas Maccabeus and the Hellenist party. The influence of the Hellenic Party all but collapses in the wake of the Seleucid defeat.", "The Jewish High Priest Menelaus, who is supported by the Hellenist party, is removed from office and is executed. His successor is a moderate member of the Hellenist party, Alcimus. However, when Alcimus executes sixty Jews who are opposed to him, he finds himself in open conflict with the Maccabees. Alcimus flees from Jerusalem and goes to Damascus to ask the Seleucid king, Demetrius I, for help.", "The Maccabees, led by Judas Maccabeus, and a Seleucid army, led by the Seleucid general Nicanor, fight the Battle of Adasa, near Beth-horon. Maccabeus wins the battle and Nicanor is killed.", "Ptolemy VIII Euergetes, now king of Cyrenaica, convinces the Roman Senate to back his claim for control of Cyprus, but the Egyptian king Ptolemy VI Philometor ignores this threat, and after Ptolemy VIII Euergetes' attempt to conquer the island fails, the Roman Senate disengages from the dispute.", "The Roman playwright Terence's plays Eunuchus (The Eunuch) and Phormio are first performed.", "Envoys of Judas Maccabeus conclude a treaty of friendship with the Roman Senate."], "birth": ["Cleopatra III, queen of Egypt from 142 BC (d. 101 BC)", "Demetrius II Nicator, king of the Seleucid Empire from 145 BC and 129 BC (d. 125 BC)"]}, "-160": {"death": ["Gaius Laelius, Roman general and politician who has been involved in Rome's victory during the Second Punic War between Rome and Carthage (approximate date)", "Lucius Aemilius Paullus Macedonicus, Roman consul, politician and general whose victory over the Macedonians in the Battle of Pydna has ended the Third Macedonian War (b. c. 229 BC)", "Artaxias I, king of Armenia who has ruled since 190 BC and the founder of the Artaxiad Dynasty, whose members would rule the Kingdom of Armenia for nearly two centuries", "Apollodotus I, Indo-Greek king who, since 180 BC, has ruled the western and southern parts of the Indo-Greek kingdom, from Taxila in Punjab to the areas of Sindh and possibly Gujarat", "Judas Maccabeus, third son of the Jewish priest Mattathias, who has led the Maccabean revolt against the Seleucid Empire until his death", "Timarchus, Seleucid nobleman, possibly from Miletus in Anatolia, appointed governor of Media in western Iran by the Seleucid king Antiochus IV Epiphanes and who has rebelled against his successor, Demetrius I Soter, until he is killed in a battle with Demetrius' forces"], "event": ["The Seleucid king, Demetrius I, on campaign in the east of his empire, leaves his general Bacchides to govern the western portion of it.", "In response to the Jewish high priest, Alcimus', request for assistance, the Seleucid general Bacchides leads an army into Judea with the intent of reconquering this now independent kingdom. Bacchides rapidly marches through Judea after carrying out a massacre of the Assideans in Galilee. He quickly makes for Jerusalem, besieging the city and trapping Judas Maccabeus, the spiritual and military leader of the Maccabees, inside. However, Judas and many of his supporters manage to escape the siege.", "Judas Maccabeus and many of his supporters regroup to face the Seleucid forces in the Battle of Elasa (near modern day Ramallah). Greatly outnumbered, the Maccabees are defeated and Judas Maccabeus is killed during the battle.", "Judas Maccabeus is succeeded as army commander and leader of the Maccabees by his younger brother, Jonathan.", "Demetrius I defeats and kills the rebel general Timarchus and is recognized as king of the Seleucid empire by the Roman Senate. Demetrius acquires his surname of Soter (meaning Saviour) from the Babylonians, for delivering them from the tyranny of Timarchus. The Seleucid empire is temporarily united again.", "The Parthian King, Mithradates I, seizes Media from the Seleucids following the death of Timarchus.", "The king of Bactria, Eucratides I, is considered to have killed Apollodotus I, an Indo-Greek king who rules the western and southern parts of the Indo-Greek kingdom, when he invades the western territories of that kingdom.", "A Painted banner, from the tomb of the wife of the Marquis of Dai (of the Han Dynasty in Mawangdui, Changsha, Hunan, is made (approximate date). It is nowadays preserved at the Historical museum in Beijing.", "Artavasdes I succeeds his father Artaxias I as king of Armenia.", "The Roman playwright Terence's play Adelphoe (The Brothers) is first performed at the funeral of the Roman general, Lucius Aemilius Paullus Macedonicus."], "birth": ["Jugurtha, King of Numidia (d. 104 BC)", "Theodosius of Bithynia, Greek astronomer and mathematician who will write the Sphaerics, a book on the geometry of the sphere (d. c. 100 BC)"]}, "-159": {"death": ["Eucratides I, king of Bactria, who has reigned since around 170 BC.", "Eumenes II, king of Pergamon.", "Publius Terentius Afer (Terence), Roman comic dramatist, the author of six verse comedies that are long regarded as models of pure Latin (b. c. 195 BC) (approximate date).", "Alcimus, high priest of Judea."], "event": ["With the Seleucid victory in Judea over the Maccabees, Alcimus is re-established as the Jewish high priest and a strong force is left in Jerusalem to support him. However, he does not enjoy his triumph for long as he dies soon after from a paralytic stroke.", "While Eucratides I is in north west India to claim possession of the previous Bactrian King Demetrius I's territory there, the Parthians, under Mithradates I, annex two Bactrian provinces. Returning from India to reconquer them, Eucratides is murdered by his son."], "birth": ["Quintus Mucius Scaevola Augur, politician of the Roman Republic and an early authority on Roman law (d. 88 BC) (approximate date)"]}, "-158": {"death": ["Eumenes II, King of Pergamum who has ruled since 197 BC and a member of the Attalid dynasty; a brilliant statesman, he has brought his small kingdom to the peak of its power and made Pergamum a great centre of Greek culture in Anatolia"], "event": ["At the request of the Romans, Ariarathes V, king of Cappadocia, rejects a proposal from the Seleucid king, Demetrius I, for him to marry the sister of Demetrius I. In response, Seleucid forces attack Cappadocia and remove Ariarathes V from the Cappadocian throne. Demetrius I then replaces him with Orophernes Nicephorus, a supposed son of the late king, Ariarathes IV. With Ariarathes V deprived of his kingdom, he flees to Rome.", "Attalus II Philadelphus, the second son of Attalus I Soter of Pergamum, ascends the throne following the death of his elder brother, Eumenes II."], "birth": ["Publius Rutilius Rufus, Roman consul, statesman, orator and historian (d. c. 78 BC)"]}, "-157": {"death": ["Wen of Han, emperor of the Chinese Han Dynasty since 180 BC (b. 202 BC)"], "event": ["The Carthaginians, prevented by their treaty with Rome from engaging in armed resistance, but equally guaranteed against any loss of territory, appeal to Rome against the depredations of King Masinissa of Numidia. The Roman censor Marcus Porcius Cato heads a commission which arbitrates a truce between Carthage and her former ally, Masinissa.", "During his time in Carthage, Cato is so struck by the evidence of Carthaginian prosperity that he is convinced that the security of Rome now depends on the annihilation of Carthage. From this time on, Cato keeps repeating the cry \"Ceterum censeo Carthaginem esse delendam\" (\"Moreover, I advise that Carthage must be destroyed\") at the end of all his speeches, no matter what subject they concern.", "After Ariarathes V has been deposed from the Cappadocian throne by the Seleucid king Demetrius I Soter and has fled to Rome, the new king of Cappadocia, Orophernes, sends two ambassadors to Rome to join the Seleucid emissaries of Demetrius in opposing Ariarathes V's return to power. Despite their efforts, Ariarathes V is restored to his throne by the Romans. However, Rome allows Orophernes to reign jointly with him. The joint government, however, does not last long, as Ariarathes V becomes sole king of Cappadocia shortly afterwards.", "Jonathan Maccabeus is recognised by the Seleucids as a minor king within their dominions."], "birth": ["Gaius Marius, Roman general and politician who will be elected consul seven times; he will also introduce major reforms to the Roman army, authorising recruitment of landless citizens and reorganising the structure of the legions (d. 86 BC)", "Sanatruces (also known as Sinatruces or Sanatruk), King of Parthia who will rule the Parthian Empire from around 77 BC (approximate date) (d. c. 70 BC)"]}, "-156": {"death": [], "event": ["The first Dalmatian war begins."], "birth": ["Wu of Han, seventh emperor of the Chinese Han Dynasty, who will rule from 141 BC; during his reign, there will be a vast territorial expansion and he will organise a strong and centralized Chinese Confucian state (d. 87 BC)"]}, "-155": {"death": ["Empress Dowager Bo, imperial concubine of Emperor Gao of the Han dynasty"], "event": ["Under the command of Punicus and then Cesarus, the Lusitani, a Hispanic tribe, reach a point near modern day Gibraltar. Here they are defeated by the Roman praetor Lucius Mummius.", "As part of the Roman efforts to fully conquer and occupy the whole of Illyria, a Roman army under consul Publius Cornelius Scipio Nasica Corculum attacks the Dalmatians for the first time and conquers the Dalmatian capital of Delminium. As a result, the Dalmatians are compelled to pay tribute to Rome, which puts an end to the first Dalmatian war. In recognition of his victory, Corculum is granted a triumph in Rome.", "Menander I (known as Milinda in Sanskrit and Pali) begins his reign as king of the Indo-Greek Kingdom. His territories cover the eastern dominions of the divided Greek empire of Bactria (Panjshir and Kapisa) and extend to the modern Pakistani province of Punjab, most of the Indian states of Punjab and Himachal Pradesh and the Jammu region. His capital is considered to have been Sagala, a prosperous city in northern Punjab believed to be modern Sialkot."], "birth": []}, "-154": {"death": [], "event": ["The Lusitanians harry the inhabitants of the Roman provinces in Hispania. At the same time, the Celtiberians of Numantia on the Douro revolt against their Roman occupation.", "After a two year struggle, Attalus II Philadelphus of Pergamum is finally able to defeat Prusias II, the aggressive king of Bithynia in northern Anatolia. He is assisted in his battle against Prusias II by Ariarathes V of Cappadocia (who has sent his son Demetrius to command of his forces) and by the Romans.", "After his victory, Attalus II insists on heavy reparations from Prusias II. In response, Prusias II sends his son Nicomedes to Rome to ask the Romans' help in reducing the amount of these reparations.", "The Egyptian king Ptolemy VI Philometor defeats his brother, Ptolemy VIII Euergetes, after he attempts to seize Cyprus by force. Nevertheless Philometor restores his brother to Cyrenaica, marries one of his daughters to him, and grants him a grain subsidy.", "The Rebellion of the Seven States against the Han Dynasty fails and Emperor Jing of Han further consolidates his power at the expense of the regional, semi-autonomous kings governing the eastern portion of the empire."], "birth": ["Gaius Gracchus, Roman politician, younger brother of Tiberius Sempronius Gracchus, who, like him, will pursue a popular political agenda that ultimately ends in his death (d. 121 BC)", "Lucius Aelius Stilo Praeconinus, Roman philologist and speechwriter (d. 74 BC)"]}, "-153": {"death": [], "event": ["The uprisings in Rome's Hispanic provinces oblige the year's consuls to take office earlier than the traditional date of 15 March, a change that becomes permanent. Some suggest that, as a consequence, January 1 becomes the first day of the Roman year.", "The Seleucid king Demetrius I Soter's relations with Attalus II Philadelphus of Pergamum and Ptolemy VI Philometor of Egypt deteriorate to the point where they support a rival claimant to the Syrian throne, Alexander Balas, who claims to be the son of the former Seleucid king Antiochus IV Epiphanes and, therefore, a first cousin of Demetrius. He has been \"discovered\" by Heracleides, a former minister of Antiochus IV and brother of Timarchus, who has been executed by Demetrius I Soter in 160 BC after leading a revolt against him in Media.", "As a result of the rise of the pretender, Alexander Balas, Demetrius I Soter is forced to recall most of his garrisons in Judea. To retain control of Judea, he makes a bid to gain the loyalty of Jonathan Maccabeus, whom he permits to recruit an army and to take back the hostages that the Syrians are holding in the city of Acre. Jonathan gladly accepts these terms, takes up residence in Jerusalem and begins to fortify the city, becoming High Priest of Jurusalem until 143 BC.", "Substantial parts of the city of Sikyon are destroyed by an earthquake."], "birth": []}, "-152": {"death": ["Marcus Aemilius Lepidus, Roman statesman, consul, Pontifex Maximus and censor; as a praetor, he has been governor of Sicily in 191 BC", "Marcus Porcius Cato Licinianus, Roman jurist, son of Cato the Elder by his first wife, Licinia"], "event": ["The pretender to the Seleucid throne, Alexander Balas, makes contact with Jonathan Maccabeus offering him terms even more favorable than those offered by the king Demetrius I Soter. In particular, Alexander offers him the official appointment as High Priest in Jerusalem. In response, Jonathan withdraws his support from Demetrius and declares his allegiance to Alexander. Thus Jonathan becomes the first member of his family to achieve appointment as High Priest."], "birth": []}, "-151": {"death": ["Pusyamitra Sunga,[1]Indian emperor and founder of the Indian Sunga dynasty, who has reigned since 185 BC"], "event": ["The Carthaginian debt to Rome is fully repaid, meaning that, according to Carthage, the treaty with Rome, which was put in place at the end of the Second Punic War, is no longer in force. The Romans do not agree with this interpretation. Instead they view the treaty as a permanent declaration of Carthaginian subordination to Rome.", "Numidia launches another border raid on Carthaginian soil, besieging a town. In response Carthage launches a large military expedition (25,000 soldiers) to repel the Numidian invaders.", "At Polybius' request, Scipio Aemilianus manages to gain the support of the Roman statesman Cato the Elder (whose son has married Scipio's sister Aemilia) for a proposal to release (and return to Greece) the 300 Achaean internees who are still being held without trial after being deported to Rome in 167 BC.", "Roman forces help the thriving Greek commercial port of Massilia combat raids from the Celts from Cisalpine Gaul.", "Roman armies under the leadership of praetor Servius Sulpicius Galba and the proconsul Lucius Licinius Lucullus arrive in Hispania Ulterior and begin the process of subduing the local population. The revolt of the Celtiberians of Numantia is stopped.", "Agnimitra succeeds his father Pusyamitra Sunga as emperor of the Sunga dynasty."], "birth": []}, "-150": {"death": ["Demetrius I Soter, Seleucid king of Syria from 162 BC (b. c. 187 BC)", "Mithridates IV Philopator Philadelphus, king of Pontus"], "event": ["Scipio Aemilianus is sent by the Roman general, Lucius Licinius Lucullus, to Numidia to obtain some elephants from the Numidian king Masinissa, the friend of his grandfather Scipio Africanus. While there, he witnesses a great but indecisive battle between the Numidians and the Carthaginians. The latter then asks Scipio Aemilianus to arrange a settlement, but the negotiations break down.", "The Roman Senate shows displeasure with Carthage's decision to wage war against its neighbour without Roman consent, and tells Carthage that in order to avoid a war it has to \"satisfy the Roman People\". The Roman censor, Cato the Elder, urges the destruction of Carthage and the Roman Senate orders the gathering of an army.", "The pretender to the Seleucid throne, Alexander Balas, who claims to be the son of the late Antiochus IV, defeats the Seleucid king, Demetrius I Soter, in battle and kills him. The Roman Senate, along with Attalus II Philadelphus of Pergamum and Ptolemy VI Philometor of Egypt, support Alexander Balas and he becomes the ruler of the Seleucid Empire. Demetrius I Soter's son, Demetrius, goes into exile in Crete.", "The new king of the Seleucid Empire, Alexander Balas, marries Cleopatra Thea, a daughter of Ptolemy VI Philometor of Egypt.", "Nicomedes, the son of king Prusias II of Bithynia, who has been sent to Rome to argue for smaller reparations arising from his father's unsuccessful war against Pergamum, gains the support of the Roman Senate to the point where Prusias sends an emissary with secret orders to assassinate Nicomedes. However, the emissary reveals the plot to Nicomedes and persuades him to rebel against his father.", "Mithridates V Euergetes succeeds his uncle Mithridates IV Philopator Philadelphus as king of Pontus. He continues the strategy of maintaining an alliance with the Romans which was started by his predecessor.", "The Romans, led by praetor Servius Sulpicius Galba, defeat the Lusitanians in a major battle in Hispania. He then breaks his promise to the defeated Lusitanian rebels by instituting a massacre of 9,000 of their number during the peace talks. Later 20,000 more Lusitanians are sold as slaves in Gaul.", "The making of the statue Hellenistic Ruler begins and is finished ten years later. It is now kept at the Museo Nazionale Romano in Rome.", "The making of the statue Aphrodite of Melos (also called Venus de Milo) begins and is finished 25 years later. It is discovered in 1820 and is now kept at the Mus\u00e9e du Louvre in Paris.", "The enlargement of the Great Stupa of Sanchi, Madhya Pradesh, India begins, taking about 100 years."], "birth": []}, "-149": {"death": ["Cato the Elder, Roman statesman (b. 234 BC)[3]", "Prusias II of Bithynia (assassinated) (b. c. 182 BC)"], "event": ["The Third Punic War begins.[1] The Romans land an army in Africa to begin the Battle of Carthage.", "Servius Sulpicius Galba is prosecuted for corruption while serving in Spain, but is acquitted after he parades his weeping family members before the tribunal.", "The turmoil in Spain escalates again with the renewal of the Lusitanian War, under the leadership of Viriathus, and the Celtiberian War.", "Andriscus, the last king of Macedon, ascends to the throne.[2]", "With Roman help, Nicomedes II overthrows his father Prusias II as king of Bithynia."], "birth": []}, "-148": {"death": ["Masinissa, king of Numidia (b. c. 238 BC)", "Yuan Ang, Chinese statesman of the Han Dynasty"], "event": ["Corlea Trackway built in County Longford", "With the defeat of Andriscus in the Battle of Pydna by Quintus Caecilius Metellus Macedonicus, Macedon is reorganized as a Roman province by 146 BC.", "Construction of the Via Postumia, linking Aquileia and Genua.", "Publius Cornelius Scipio Aemilianus divides Numidia among the three sons of the recently deceased Masinissa."], "birth": []}, "-147": {"death": ["Empress Bo"], "event": ["Scipio Aemilianus takes command in the Battle of Carthage. He built a mole across the gulf into the harbour, the Carthaginians dug a canal from their inner harbour basin to the coast and put to sea with a full fleet, but they are defeated in a naval engagement.", "Carthage recalled from exile an able general, named Hasdrubal, who organized their solid defences. Against the 45-foot (13.7 m) city walls, the Romans made slow progress.", "In Lusitania, Hispania, the Celtic king Viriathus, rallies Lusitanian resistance to Rome.", "Demetrius II of Syria returns to Syria (approximate date).", "Jonathan Maccabaeus conquers Joppa.", "Macedonia becomes a part of the Roman empire."], "birth": ["Lokaksema, a Buddhist monk from Gandhara (modern Pakistan/Afghanistan), Yuezhi in ethnicity, the first to translate Mahayana scriptures into the Chinese language during the Han Dynasty"]}, "-146": {"death": ["November 28 \u2013 Gentius, the last king of Illyria", "Critolaus, general of the Achaean League (killed in battle)"], "event": ["With Carthage and Greece conquered, Rome becomes the sole superpower in the Mediterranean world, a distinction it will continue to hold for approximately the next 600 years.", "Carthage falls to Roman forces under Scipio Aemilianus. The walls are finally breached and the city is completely destroyed by order of the Roman Senate, despite Scipio's protests. End of the Third Punic War.", "Battle of Corinth \u2013 The Romans under Lucius Mummius defeat the Achaean League under Critolaus near Corinth. Corinth is destroyed, and the Achaean League dissolved. Greece becomes a Roman province. The Romans strip Corinth of its art treasures and ship them back to Rome.", "Hipparchus determines the equinoctial point."], "birth": []}, "-145": {"death": ["Ptolemy VI of Egypt (killed in battle) (b. c. 186 BC)", "Ptolemy VII of Egypt (assassinated)[1]", "Alexander Balas (assassinated)"], "event": ["In the Battle of Antioch, Ptolemy VI Philometor defeats the Seleucid usurper Alexander Balas, but dies in the battle.", "Ptolemy VII becomes king of Egypt briefly, then is assassinated by Ptolemy VIII.[1]", "Hipparchus determines the length of the tropical year."], "birth": ["Sima Qian, Chinese historian (or 135 BC) (d. 86 BC)[2]"]}, "-144": {"death": [], "event": ["The Aqua Marcia aqueduct is built in Rome.", "Parthians take Babylonia."], "birth": []}, "-143": {"death": ["Jonathan Maccabaeus (slain by Diodotus Tryphon)", "Zhou Yafu, general of Han Dynasty"], "event": ["The Celtiberian War ends when Quintus Caecilius Metellus Macedonicus crushes the rebels."], "birth": ["Marcus Antonius Orator, Roman politician"]}, "-142": {"death": [], "event": ["Diodotus Tryphon seizes the throne of the Seleucid Empire.", "The first stone bridge over the Tiber river is completed.", "Simon Maccabaeus succeeds his brother Jonathan as High Priest of Judea until 135 BC."], "birth": ["Ptolemy IX, Egyptian pharaoh"]}, "-141": {"death": ["Emperor Jing of Han China, Emperor of China (b. 188 BC)"], "event": ["Tocharian refugees appear on the borders of the Greco-Bactrian kingdom.", "Emperor Wu of Han (\"Martial Emperor\") starts to rule.", "The Seleucid garrison negotiates the surrender of Jerusalem. Simon Maccabaeus assumes control of that city. He becomes prince (ruler) of Judea until 135 BC.", "Demetrius II of Syria made prisoner of Mithridates, king of the Parthians. Antiochus VII Sidetes becomes king of the Seleucid Empire in his absence."], "birth": []}, "-140": {"death": [], "event": ["Scipio Aemilianus leads a group of Roman ambassadors to Alexandria, where they meet with Ptolemy VIII.", "Simon Maccabaeus crowned king of Judea.", "Han Wudi becomes emperor of China."], "birth": ["Lucius Licinius Crassus, Roman consul (d. 91 BC)", "Huo Qubing, Chinese general of the Han Dynasty (d. 117 BC)", "Su Wu (d. 60 BC)[1]"]}, "-139": {"death": ["Viriathus, Lusitanian leader (assassinated)"], "event": ["Emperor Wu of Han sends an envoy into Bactria, Parthia and Ferghana.", "The Lusitanian War ends when the rebellion collapses after the assassination of Viriathus by a Roman agent.", "Hipparchus makes a very precise determination of the length of the synodic month."], "birth": []}, "-138": {"death": ["Diodotus Tryphon (suicide)", "Mithridates I, King of Parthia (b. c. 195 BC)", "Attalus II Philadelphus, King of Pergamon (b. 220 BC)"], "event": ["Phraates II becomes Emperor of Parthia.", "Zhang Qian begins his explorations in central Asia for Chinese emperor Han Wu Di.", "The first Chinese diplomatic mission to the Ferghana valley, led by Chang Chien, is sent.", "Hymn to Apollo is written and inscribed on stone in Delphi; it is the earliest surviving notated music, in a substantial and legible fragment, in the western world."], "birth": ["Sulla, Roman politician (approximate date) (d. 78 BC)"]}, "-137": {"death": ["King Dutugemunu of Sri Lanka", "Zhao Tuo, King (Emperor) Wu of Nanyue"], "event": ["Slaves led by Eunus of Apamea in Sicily revolt against the Romans.", "Tiberius Sempronius Gracchus, quaestor in Spain, observes that slave labor has displaced small freeheld farms.", "Valencia is founded.", "Numantian War begun, Quintus Pompeius and M. Papilius Laenas were defeated and disgraced by the Numantians in subsequent years.", "Q. Pompeius is brought to trial by Q.Metellus and others, but acquitted."], "birth": ["Lucius Cornelius Sulla"]}, "-136": {"death": [], "event": ["Confucianism is adopted as the state religion in China by the emperor Wu Di."], "birth": []}, "-135": {"death": ["Menander I, King of the Indo-Greek Kingdom", "Simon Maccabaeus, prince of Judea and High Priest of Judea"], "event": ["Menander I, King of the Indo-Greek Kingdom dies and is succeeded by Epander.", "The First Servile War starts.[1]"], "birth": ["Sima Qian, Chinese historian (or 145 BC) (d. 86 BC)", "Posidonius of Apamea, Greek Stoic philosopher and scientist (d. 51 BC)"]}, "-134": {"death": [], "event": ["Scipio Aemilianus, victor of Carthage, takes command in Spain against the Numantians. He recruits 20,000 men and 40,000 allies, including Numidian cavalry under Jugurtha. Scipio, an expert in sieges, builds a ring of seven forts and a ditch palisade before beginning the Siege of Numantia. The perimeter of the circumvallations is twice as long as that of the city. The river Durius (Douro), enables the defenders to be supplied by small boats.", "Caius Fulvius Flaccus, as consul, is sent against the slaves. Uprising of 4,000 slaves crushed at Sinuessa, in Campania. Slave uprisings repressed in Attic silver mines and on the island of Delos.", "John Hyrcanus becomes high priest and prince (ruler) of Judea, until 104 BC, following the murder of his father Simon Maccabaeus by Ptolemy the son of Abubus in 135 BC.", "Hipparchus discovers the precession of the equinoxes.", "Hipparchus creates a star catalogue."], "birth": ["Publius Servilius Vatia Isauricus, Roman statesman (d. 44 BC)"]}, "-133": {"death": ["Attalus III, king of Pergamon. In his will, he makes the people of Rome his heirs (b. 170 BC)", "Tiberius Sempronius Gracchus the Roman tribune (assassination) (b. 168 BC)"], "event": ["Lucius Calpurnius Piso Frugi, as consul, is sent against the slaves in Italy. Gaius Marius serves under Publius Cornelius Scipio Aemilianus at Numantia.", "Scipio Aemilianus captures Numantia,[1] after a siege of eight months, suffering famine and pestilence. The remnant population of 4,000 citizens, surrender and set their city on fire. Thus ends the Numantine War.", "Tiberius Sempronius Gracchus, is elected tribune of the people. He attempts to pass a law to redistribute the public land to benefit small landowners. Opposed by wealthier factions in the Roman Senate, he is killed by a group of Senators and their followers that same year.", "The Kingdom of Pergamum is deeded to Rome.", "June \u2013 A large army of the Han Dynasty, under commanders such as Li Guang, attempt to ambush the Xiongnu leader in the Battle of Mayi. The plot fails, and the battle is determined a draw."], "birth": []}, "-132": {"death": ["Tiberius Gracchus, Roman tribune (assassinated by senators) (b. 168 BC)", "Eunus, leader of slave revolt (136\u2013132 BC) in Sicily"], "event": ["The First Servile War ends when Publius Rupilius quelled the rebellion.", "The assassination of Tiberius Gracchus, which many historians marked as the beginning of the end of the Roman Republic.", "The Late Formative (or pre-Classic) period of the Maya civilization begins.[1]"], "birth": ["Mithridates VI, King of Pontus (d. 63 BC)"]}, "-131": {"death": [], "event": ["Aristonicus of Pergamon leads an uprising against Rome, and consul Publius Licinius Crassus Mucianius is killed in the fighting.", "The Roman censor Quintus Caecilius Metellus Macedonicus attempts to remove the tribune Gaius Atinius Labeo Macerio from the Senate, the angry Atinius drags him to be thrown off the Tarpeian Rock, and Metellus is only saved by the intervention of other senators.", "The tribune Gaius Papirius Carbo passes a measure allowing the use of secret ballots in legislative assemblies.", "For the first time in Roman history, both censors are plebeians (Metellus and Quintus Pompeius).", "First Acta Diurna appears in Rome around this time."], "birth": []}, "-130": {"death": ["Pacuvius, tragic poet, died in Tarentum (b. c. 220 BC)"], "event": [], "birth": []}, "-129": {"death": ["Antiochus VII Sidetes (killed in battle)", "Carneades, philosopher, and founder of Third Academy (b. c. 214 BC)", "P. Cornelius Scipio Aemilianus Africanus Numantinus (Africanus the Younger) (b. 185 BC)"], "event": ["Kingdom of Pergamon, including Hierapolis, becomes the Roman Province of Asia upon death of last Attalid king, Attalos III, and after the defeat of the pretender Aristonicus by M. Perperna, with Cappadocian assistance.", "C. Sempronius Tuditanus celebrates his triumph over the Iapydes of Illyria.", "Scipio Aemilianus, victor of Carthage is assassinated by his enemies in Rome.", "Battle of Ecbatana: The Seleucid King Antiochus VII Sidetes is defeated and killed by the Parthians under Phraates II, ending Seleucid control over Media or Mesopotamia.", "Having been freed by the Parthians, Demetrius II of Syria recovers the throne of the Seleucid Empire.", "Emperor Han Wudi of China of the Han dynasty launches his first offensive into the northern steppe.", "Hipparchus publishes his catalog of stars.", "Total solar eclipse, used by Hipparchus to estimate distance to the moon."], "birth": []}, "-128": {"death": ["Phraates II of Parthia (approximate date)"], "event": ["Cn. Octavius and T. Annius Rufus are this year's consuls", "The Greco-Bactrian kingdom is overrun by the Tocharians and renamed Tocharistan.", "Artabanus I becomes King of Parthia (approximate date)", "Limenius composes the Second Delphic Hymn."], "birth": ["Liu Ju, a Han Dynasty Chinese prince (d. 91 BC)"]}, "-127": {"death": [], "event": ["The Scythians defeat the Parthians in a battle around Media."], "birth": ["Quintus Caecilius Metellus Pius (d. 63 BC)"]}, "-126": {"death": [], "event": ["Tyre successfully revolts from the Seleucid Empire.", "Seleucus V Philometor succeeds his father Demetrius II as king of the Seleucid Empire. Due to his youth, his stepmother Cleopatra Thea acts as regent."], "birth": []}, "-125": {"death": ["Seleucus V Philometor (killed by Cleopatra Thea)", "Demetrius II, king of the Seleucid Empire"], "event": ["Cleopatra Thea succeeds to the rule of the Seleucid Empire on the death of Seleucus V.[1] She appoints Antiochus VIII Grypus as co-ruler.", "In Rome, Marcus Fulvius Flaccus proposes the extension of Roman citizenship to the northern Italians, but the Senate reacts by sending him off to deal with disturbances around Massilia. And in so doing commenced the conquest of Transalpine Gaul."], "birth": ["Quintus Sertorius"]}, "-124": {"death": ["Artabanus I of Parthia"], "event": ["Fregellae's revolt against Rome begins in Latium. Later the city is captured and destroyed by the Romans.", "Mithridates II succeeds Artabanus I as King of Parthia.", "Cleopatra II of Egypt and her brother Ptolemy VIII of Egypt reconcile."], "birth": []}, "-123": {"death": ["Alexander II Zabinas, ruler of the Seleucids"], "event": ["Gaius Gracchus elected Roman tribune for the first time. He waited until after his re-election the following year before pushing forward the various civil and agrarian reforms that his brother championed in 133 BC.", "Aix-en-Provence founded under the name of Aquae Sextiae by the Roman consul Sextius Calvinus."], "birth": []}, "-122": {"death": ["Liu An, Chinese prince, geographer, and cartographer (b. 179 BC)"], "event": ["Marcus Fulvius Flaccus and Gaius Gracchus become tribunes and propose a number of radical reforms in Rome.", "Gracchus passes a law requiring the state to provide weapons and equipment for the soldiers in the Roman army."], "birth": []}, "-121": {"death": ["Gaius Gracchus", "M. Fulvius Flaccus (b. 154 BC)", "Cleopatra Thea (failed attempt to poison her stepson) (b. c. 164 BC)"], "event": ["The Roman Senate passes the motion senatus consultum ultimum, which the consul Lucius Opimius interprets as giving him unlimited power to preserve the Republic. He gathers an armed force of Senators and their supporters to confront Gaius Gracchus. A pitched battle is fought inside Rome, resulting in the death of Gracchus and many of his followers.", "A tribunal is established in Rome that executes 3,000 followers of Gracchus.", "Consul Quintus Fabius Maximus, allied with the Aedui, defeated the Arverni and Allobroges in Transalpine Gaul, thus establishing the province for Rome.", "The finest vintage of Falernian wine, known as the Opimian vintage, was bottled from vines grown on Mt Falernus between Latium and Campania.", "Led by General Ho Chu-ping, the Chinese defeat the Xiongnu."], "birth": ["Publius Sulpicius Rufus, tribune of the plebs (d. 88 BC)", "Sertorius, Roman general (d. 72 BC)"]}, "-120": {"death": ["Hipparchus, Greek astronomer and mathematician, on Rhodes (approximate date) (b. c. 190 BC)", "Polybius, Greek historian (b. c. 203 BC)"], "event": [], "birth": ["Berenice III, reigning Queen of Egypt (d. 80 BC)", "Lucius Cornelius Sisenna, writer and politician (d. 67 BC)", "Verres, corrupt praetor (approximate date) (d. 43 BC)"]}, "-119": {"death": ["Li Guang, Chinese general of the Han Dynasty"], "event": ["Hipparchus replaces Eumachus as Archon of Athens.", "The second Dalmatian war begins.", "January\u2013June \u2013 the Han Chinese army under the commanders Wei Qing (d. 106 BC) and Huo Qubing (140 BC\u2013117 BC) are victorious over the Xiongnu in the Battle of Mobei, taken place in the Orkhon Valley of the Gobi Desert, modern Mongolia.", "Government monopolies are established in iron, salt, liquor in Ancient China."], "birth": []}, "-118": {"death": ["Micipsa, king of Numidia"], "event": ["The Roman colony of Narbo Martius is founded in Gallia Transalpina.", "The second Dalmatian war ends with victory for Rome and L. Caecilius Metellus assumes the surname Delmaticus", "Micipsa dies and Numidia, following the king's wish, is divided into three parts, a third each ruled by Micipsa's own sons, Adherbal and Hiempsal I, and the king's adopted son, Jugurtha."], "birth": ["Lucullus, Roman consul (d. 56 BC)"]}, "-116": {"death": ["Cleopatra II of Egypt (b. c. 185 BC)", "June 26 \u2013 Ptolemy VIII of Egypt (b. c. 182 BC)"], "event": ["June 26 \u2013 At the death of Ptolemy VIII Physcon, Cleopatra III has chosen her younger son Ptolemy X Alexander as co-regent, but the Alexandrians forced her to bring Ptolemy IX from Cyprus, of which he is governor.", "Ptolemy IX Philometor Soter II Lathyros becomes king of Egypt and claims the throne."], "birth": ["Marcus Terentius Varro, Roman scholar (d. 27 BC)"]}, "-115": {"death": ["Publius Mucius Scaevola", "Quintus Caecilius Metellus Macedonicus (b. c. 210 BC)"], "event": ["Parthia makes a trade treaty with China.", "The Kingdom of Sheba collapses.", "Gaius Marius is praetor in Rome, he defeats tribes in modern-day Spain."], "birth": ["Marcus Licinius Crassus, Roman politician (d. 53 BC)"]}, "-114": {"death": ["Zhang Qian, Chinese explorer and diplomat (b. 195 BC)"], "event": ["The first temple of Venus is built.", "Mithridates VI Eupator becomes king of Bosporus."], "birth": []}, "-113": {"death": ["Prince Liu Sheng"], "event": ["The Cimbri and Teutones cross the Danube and enter the lands of the Celtic tribe, the Taurisci. They appeal to Rome for assistance and the Senate sends an army under Gnaeus Papirius Garbo to drive them back. The Romans attack the retreating columns as they pass the town of Noreia, but the Roman army is defeated in an ambush.", "Germanic tribes attack Gaul and northern Spain.", "War between the Celtiberians and the Romans.", "Antiochus IX Cyzicenus becomes king of Seleucid Persia.", "Incense burner, from the tomb of Prince Liu Sheng, Mancheng, Hebei, is made. Han dynasty. It is now kept at Hebei Provincial Museum, Shijiazhuang."], "birth": []}, "-112": {"death": ["Empress Wang Zhi (b. 173 BC)"], "event": ["Jugurtha declares war against the Roman Republic (ends 105 BC).", "Asian Silk Road opens."], "birth": []}, "-111": {"death": [], "event": ["The city of Rome is devastated by fire.", "Jugurtha, king of Numidia, bribes the commander Lucius Calpurnius Bestia and Roman friends to secure easy terms. He is given a safeconduct to Rome in order to account for his actions in the Roman Senate. Jugurtha contemptuously bribes his way through all difficulties.", "The Han Empire annexes the Vietnamese kingdom of Nam Viet, and thereby extends its territory to modern-day North Vietnam.", "During the reign of Emperor Wu of the Han Dynasty, Guilin is named Shi An Prefecture.", "Jiuquan in China is founded as a military outpost on the Silk Road to Central Asia."], "birth": []}, "-110": {"death": ["Edersceal, 95th monarch of Ireland"], "event": ["Jugurtha king of Numidia defeats a Roman army under Aulus Postumius Albinus.", "Han Dynasty of China annexes Minyue."], "birth": ["Gaius Marius the Younger (d. 82 BC)", "Marcus Petreius (d. 46 BC)"]}, "-109": {"death": [], "event": ["A Roman army under Marcus Junius Silanus (consul 109 BC) is defeated by the Cimbri and Teutones near the Rhone River."], "birth": ["Spartacus, Roman slave and rebel leader (d. 71 BC)"]}, "-108": {"death": ["Marcus Livius Drusus the Elder, Roman statesman"], "event": ["Roman forces under Quintus Caecilius Metellus Numidicus defeat the forces of Jugurtha of Numidia at the Battle of the Muthul, with Gaius Marius as a subordinate.", "The Korean kingdom of Wiman Joseon falls, and Chinese Emperor Wu of Han establishes the Lelang Commandery in northern Korea.", "December \u2013 The Han Dynasty Chinese under commander Zhao Ponu are victorious in the Battle of Loulan in the Tarim Basin, resulting in the submission of Dayuan and the Wusun in Central Asia."], "birth": ["L. Sergius Catilina, Roman statesman (d. 62 BC)"]}, "-107": {"death": [], "event": ["The uprising of Saumachus against Mithridates VI in the Bosporan Kingdom.", "Gaius Marius, having enacted the Marian reforms of the Roman army, arrived in North Africa to lead the war against Jugurtha, with a young quaestor named Lucius Cornelius Sulla as a subordinate."], "birth": ["Servilia Caepionis, mistress of Julius Caesar"]}, "-106": {"death": ["Wei Qing, Chinese general of the Han Dynasty"], "event": ["Sulla captures Jugurtha, thus ending the Jugurthine War.", "The Chinese and the Persians establish diplomatic ties."], "birth": ["January 3 \u2013 Cicero, Roman politician and author (d. 43 BC)", "September 29 \u2013 Pompey the Great, Roman general and politician (d. 48 BC)", "Servius Sulpicius Rufus, Roman politician (d. 43 BC)"]}, "-105": {"death": ["Marcus Aurelius Scaurus, Roman politician and general, executed as a prisoner of war in the advent of the battle of Arausio"], "event": ["October 6 \u2013 The Battle of Arausio, where the Cimbri destroy two Roman armies on the Rh\u00f4ne, is the most severe defeat of Roman forces since the Battle of Cannae.", "Gaius Marius, together with the consul Publius Rutilius Rufus, initiates sweeping reforms of the Roman army.", "Lucius Cornelius Sulla secures the capture of Jugurtha. His success is made possible by the treachery of Bocchus I, king of Mauretania, and this ends the Jugurthine War (which has begun in 112 BC)."], "birth": []}, "-104": {"death": ["Jugurtha, King of Numidia (execution by Rome) (b. c. 160 BC)", "Dong Zhongshu, Chinese scholar who promoted Confucianism at the central court of the Han Dynasty (b. 179 BC)", "John Hyrcanus, prince (ruler) and high priest of Judea."], "event": ["Athenion starts a slave rebellion in Segesta.", "In Rome exist a state of emergency, the way to Italy lays open to the Germanic invaders. Gaius Marius, the conqueror of Jugurtha, is elected consul for the second time.", "Second Servile War starts in Sicily.", "Aristobulus I succeeds John Hyrcanus, becoming king and high priest of Judea, until 103 BC.", "Sima Qian starts writing his Shiji."], "birth": []}, "-103": {"death": ["Aristobulus I, king of Judea."], "event": ["Tryphon and Athenion lead the Second Servile War in Sicily.", "Alexander Jannaeus succeeds his brother Aristobulus I as king and high priest of Judea, until 76 BC."], "birth": []}, "-102": {"death": [], "event": ["Gaius Marius defeats the Scirii and Teutones at Aix-en-Provence (or Battle of Aquae Sextae).", "The Cimbri defeat the Consul Quintus Lutatius Catulus in the Adige Valley.", "The Chinese under Emperor Wu of Han besiege and capture Kokand of Dayuan in the Hellenistic Ferghana Valley, during a 2 year war with the Yuezhi."], "birth": ["Quintus Tullius Cicero, Roman general (d. 43 BC)", "Julius Caesar, Roman general and politician (according to the lunar year before the Julian reform) (d. 44 BC)"]}, "-101": {"death": ["Cleopatra III of Egypt assassinated by her son Ptolemy X Alexander I (b. 161 BC)", "Boiorix, king of the Cimbri tribe, killed at the Battle of Vercellae."], "event": ["The Roman consuls Gaius Marius and Manius Aquillius defeat the Cimbri in the Battle of Campi Raudii (or Battle of Vercellae).", "Ptolemy Apion inherits the kingdom of Cyrenaica."], "birth": []}, "-100": {"death": ["Cornelia Africana, widow of Tiberius Gracchus (b. c. 190 BC)", "Lucius Appuleius Saturninus, Roman politician", "Theodosius of Bithynia, Greek astronomer and mathematician (b. c. 160 BC)"], "event": ["Consuls: Lucius Valerius Flaccus, Gaius Marius (Marius's sixth consulship).", "Manius Aquillius celebrates an ovation for victories in the Second Servile War.", "Lucius Appuleius Saturninus, a tribune, passes a law to redistribute land to military veterans. The law requires that all senators swear to abide by it. Quintus Caecilus Metellus Numidicus refuses and is exiled. He goes to Rhodes to study philosophy.", "December \u2013 Saturninus stands for consul for the following year. A rival candidate, Gaius Memmius, is found murdered by agents of Saturninus, who is declared a public enemy by the Senate. Marius, as consul, defeats his former ally in battle in the Forum. Saturninus and his followers surrender on condition that their lives are spared, but they are stoned to death with roof tiles by renegade senators.", "The building of the Sanctuary of Fortuna Primigenia, Palestrina, Italy, is begun. The model of it is now kept at the Museo Archeologico Nazionale, Italy (approximate date).", "Tigranes II of Armenia is placed on Armenian throne by the Parthians in exchange for the cession of \"seventy valleys\". (approximate date)", "The deuterocanonical books of 1 and 2 Maccabees are written.", "Elephants become extinct from Middle East by this date.", "Peasant revolts under Emperor Wu of Han. The Great Wall is extended out into the Gobi Desert, and sections of the wall are detached with signalling towers.", "Gandhara and Punjab ruled by the Indo-Greek king Demetrios III.", "History of China is written by Sima Qian (approximate date).", "Mural room in the Maya pyramid at San Bartolo, Guatemala, painted."], "birth": ["July 13 \u2013 Julius Caesar, Roman general and politician (or 102 BC) (d. 44 BC)", "Titus Labienus, Caesar's chief lieutenant in the conquest of Gaul (d. 45 BC)"]}}