{"-499": {"death": [], "event": ["After a failed attack on the rebellious island of Naxos in 502 BC (on behalf of the Persians), Aristagoras, to save himself from the wrath of Persia, plans a revolt with the Milesians and the other Ionians. With the encouragement of Histiaeus (his father-in-law and former tyrant of Miletus), Aristagoras, governor of Miletus, induces the Ionian cities of Asia Minor to revolt against Persia, thus instigating the Ionian Revolt and beginning the Greco-Persian Wars between Greece and Persia. The pro-Persian tyrant of Mytilene is stoned to death.", "Aristagoras seeks help with the revolt against the Persians from Cleomenes I, the King of Sparta, but the Spartans are unwilling to respond.", "Miltiades the Younger, the ruler of the Thracian Chersonese, which has been under Persian suzerainty since approximately 514 BC, joins the Ionian revolt. He seizes the islands of Lemnos and Imbros from the Persians."], "birth": []}, "-498": {"death": ["Amyntas I, king of Macedonia (b. c. 540 BC)", "Cleander, tyrant of Gela"], "event": ["Alexander I succeeds his father Amyntas I as king of Macedonia.", "Athens and Eretria respond to the Ionian plea for help against Persia and send troops. An Athenian and Eretrian fleet transports Athenian troops to Ephesus. There they are joined by a force of Ionians and march upon Sardis, the capital of Artaphernes (the satrap of Lydia and brother to Darius I of Persia). Artaphernes, who has sent most of his troops to besiege Miletus, is taken by surprise. However, Artaphernes is able to retreat to the citadel and hold it. Although the Greeks are unable to take the citadel, they pillage the town and set fires that burn Sardis to the ground.", "Retreating to the coast, the Greek forces are met by the Persians under Artaphernes and defeated in the Battle of Ephesus.", "Kaunos and Caria, followed by Byzantium and towns in the Hellespont also revolt against the Persians. Cyprus also joins the rebellion, as Onesilus removes his pro-Persian brother, Gorgos, from the throne of Salamis.", "After the assassination of Cleander, tyrant of Gela, power is transferred to his brother, Hippocrates, who subdues the Sicels and conquers the Chalcidian cities of Callipoli, Leontini, Naxos and Zancle (now known as Messina). He also captures the Syracusan city of Camarina, but is prevented from capturing Syracuse itself when Corinth and Corcyra interferes in the war.", "The earliest surviving of the Greek poets Pindar's epinikion (Pythian ode 10) is written."], "birth": []}, "-497": {"death": [], "event": ["Artybius ends the rebellion in Cyprus.", "The Persians launch an expedition on the Hellespont and later Caria."], "birth": []}, "-496": {"death": ["Sun Tzu, military philosopher and author of The Art of War (most likely a colloquial date) (b. 544 BC)", "King Hel\u00fc of Wu, king of the Chinese State of Wu", "Lucius Tarquinius Superbus, the exiled last King of Rome"], "event": ["Hipparchos, son of Charmos (a relative of the 6th century BC tyrant Peisistratos), wins the archonship of Athens as leader of the peace party which argues that resistance against the Persians is useless.", "The former Etruscan King of Rome, Tarquinius Superbus, who has been exiled by the Romans in 508 BC, and his ally Lars Porsena, the King of Clusium, are defeated by the new Roman Republic army in the Battle of Lake Regillus, near Frascati. The outcome of this battle establishes Roman supremacy over the Latins.", "Carthage and Rome make a treaty whereby Roman ships undertake not to trade to the west of Carthage while the Carthaginians undertake not to interfere in Latin politics.", "King Goujian of Yue defeats and banishes King Fuchai of Wu, gaining a temporary hegemony in ancient China during the Spring and Autumn Period."], "birth": ["Sophocles, Athenian dramatist and statesman (d. 406 BC)"]}, "-495": {"death": [], "event": ["A temple is built on the Circus Maximus, between the Aventine and Palatine hills, in Rome, in honour of the god Mercury.", "King Fuchai of Wu ascends to the throne after his father, King Hel\u00fc of Wu, reigning as the last king of Wu until 473 BC."], "birth": ["Pericles, Athenian politician (d. 429 BC)"]}, "-494": {"death": ["Histiaeus, tyrant of Miletus"], "event": ["Having successfully captured several of the revolting Greek city-states, the Persians under Artaphernes lay siege to Miletus. The decisive Battle of Lade is fought at the island of Lade, near Miletus' port. Although out-numbered, the Greek fleet appears to be winning the battle until the ships from Samos and Lesbos retreat. The sudden defection turns the tide of battle, and the remaining Greek fleet is completely destroyed. Miletus surrenders shortly thereafter, and the Ionian Revolt comes to an end.", "The Persian leaders Artaphernes and Mardonius grant a degree of autonomy to the Ionian cities. They abstain from financial reprisals and merely exact former levels of tribute. The Persians abolish the Greek tyrannies in Ionia and permit democracies.", "The Persians burn down the Temple of Apollo at Didyma.", "The Phoenician allies of the Persians take savage reprisals against the Greeks, whom the Phoenicians regard as pirates.", "The Thracians and Scythians drive Miltiades the Younger from the Chersonesos. Miltiades loads five boats with his treasures and makes for Athens. One of the boats, captained by Miltiades' eldest son, Metiochos is captured. Metiochos is taken as a lifelong prisoner to Persia.", "The Spartan king, Cleomenes I inflicts a severe defeat on Argos at Sepeia near Tiryns.", "The former tyrant of Miletus, Histiaeus is captured by the Persians and executed at Sardis by Artaphernes.", "At the end of a military campaign, the Plebeian element in the Roman army retires to the Sacred Mountain outside Rome. The soldiers in the so-called \"Secession of the Plebs\" threaten to found a new city. To end the succession, the plebeians gain acceptance from the patricians that they may choose two leaders to whom they give the title of Tribunes. The office of the tribunate is thereby established.", "The Senate and people of Rome appoint Manius Valerius Maximus to the office of dictator.", "The aediles, magistrates of ancient Rome who are in charge of the temple and cult of Ceres, are first established. They are two officials of the plebeians, created at the same time as the tribunes, whose sanctity they share."], "birth": []}, "-493": {"death": [], "event": ["A Phoenician-manned Persian fleet restores Persian control of Cyprus.", "The Athenian people elect Themistocles as archon, the chief judicial and civilian executive officer in Athens. He favours resistance against the Persians.", "Themistocles starts the construction of a fortified naval base at Piraeus, the port town of Athens.", "Among the refugees arriving from Ionia after the collapse of the Ionian Revolt is a chief named Miltiades, who has a fine reputation as a soldier. Themistocles makes him a general in the Athenian army.", "Coriolanus captures the Volscian town of Corioli for Rome.", "During his second consulate, the Roman consul Spurius Cassius Viscellinus concludes a mutual defence treaty with the surrounding Latin villages and tribes. The treaty recognises commercial contracts binding throughout their cities. Rome abandons its claim to hegemony over the Latin league. In return, Rome is recognised as the dominant city in the League.", "The Athenian poet Phrynicus produces a tragedy on the Fall of Miletus. The Athenian authorities ban the play from further production on the grounds of impiety."], "birth": []}, "-492": {"death": [], "event": ["The first expedition of King Darius I of Persia against Greece commences under the leadership of his son-in-law and general, Mardonius. Darius sends Mardonius to succeed his satrap (governor) in Ionia, Artaphernes, with a special commission to attack Athens and Eretria.", "The Persians under Mardonius subdue and capture Thrace and Macedonia.", "Mardonius loses some 300 ships in a storm off Mount Athos, which forces him to abandon his plans to attack Athens and Eretria.", "When Camarina, a Syracusan colony, rebels, Hippocrates, the tyrant of Gela, intervenes to wage war against Syracuse. After defeating the Syracusan army at the Heloros River, he besieges the city. However, he is persuaded by the intervention of forces from the Greek mainland city of Corinth to retreat in exchange for the possession of Camarina."], "birth": []}, "-491": {"death": ["Hippocrates, tyrant of Gela"], "event": ["Darius I sends envoys to all Greek cities, demanding \"earth and water for vassalage\" which Athens and Sparta refuse however.", "The Greek city of Aegina, fearing the loss of trade, submits to Persia. The Spartan king, Cleomenes I tries to punish Aegina for its submission to the Persians, but the other Spartan king, Demaratus, thwarts him.", "Cleomenes I engineers the deposing of Spartan co-ruler Demaratus (and his replacement by Cleomenes\u2019 cousin Leotychidas) by bribing the oracle at Delphi to announce that this action was divine will. The two Spartan kings successfully capture the Persian collaborators in Aegina.", "Hippocrates, tyrant of Gela, loses his life in a battle against the Siculi, the native Sicilian people. He is succeeded as Tyrant of Gela by Gelo, who has been his commander of cavalry.", "During a famine in Rome, Gnaeus Marcius Coriolanus advises that the people should not receive grain unless they would consent to the abolition of the office of tribune. For this, the tribunes have him condemned to exile. Coriolanus then takes refuge with the King of the Volsci and leads the Volscian army against Rome, turning back only in response to entreaties from his mother and his wife.", "The construction of a relief begins in the Apadana, a ceremonial complex at Persepolis. The relief pictures Darius I and Xerxes I receiving tribute and is now displayed in the Oriental Institute of the University of Chicago."], "birth": []}, "-490": {"death": ["Hippias, tyrant of Athens", "Callimachus, war-archon of Athens", "Appius Claudius Sabinus Inregillensis, semi-legendary founder of the Claudii"], "event": ["Darius I sends an expedition, under Artaphernes and Datis the Mede across the Aegean to attack the Athenians and the Eretrians. Hippias, the aged ex-tyrant of Athens, is on one of the Persian ships in the hope of being restored to power in Athens.", "When the Ionian Greeks in Asia Minor rebelled against Persia in 499 BC, Eretria joined Athens in sending aid to the rebels. As a result, Darius makes a point of punishing Eretria during his invasion of Greece. The city is sacked and burned and Darius enslaves its inhabitants. He intends the same fate for Athens.", "September 12 \u2013 The Battle of Marathon takes place as a Persian army of more than 20,000 men is advised by Hippias to land in the Bay of Marathon, where they meet the Athenians supported by the Plataeans. The Persians are repulsed by 11,000 Greeks under the leadership of Callimachus and Miltiades. Some 6,400 Persians are killed at a cost of 192 Athenian dead. Callimachus, the war-archon of Athens, is killed in the battle. After the battle, the Persians return home.", "Before the Battle of Marathon, the Athenians send a runner, Pheidippides, to seek help from Sparta. However, the Spartans delay sending troops to Marathon because religious requirements (the Carnea) mean they must wait for the full moon.", "The Greek historian Herodotus, the main source for the Greco-Persian Wars, mentions Pheidippides as the messenger who runs from Athens to Sparta asking for help, and then runs back, a distance of over 240 kilometres[1] each way.[2] After the battle, he runs back to Athens to spread the news and raise the spirits. It is claimed that his last words before collapsing and dying in Athens are \"Chariete nikomen\" (\"Rejoice, we are victorious\").", "Hippias dies at Lemnos on the journey back to Sardis after the Persian defeat.", "Cleomenes I is forced to flee Sparta when his plot against Demaratus is discovered, but the Spartans allow him to return when he begins gathering an army in the surrounding territories. However, by this time he has become insane, and the Spartans put him in prison. Shortly after, he commits suicide. He is succeeded as King of Sparta by a member of the Agiad house, his half-brother, Leonidas.", "The Athenians begin the building of a temple to Athena Parthenos (approximate date)."], "birth": ["Empedocles, Greek philosopher (d. c. 430 BC)", "Zeno of Elea, Greek philosopher (d. c. 430 BC)"]}, "-489": {"death": ["Miltiades, Athenian general (b. c. 550 BC)"], "event": ["After his great victory in the Battle of Marathon, Miltiades leads a naval expedition to Paros to pay off a private score. However, the expedition is unsuccessful and, on his return, he is fined in a prosecution led by Xanthippus and put in prison where he dies of wounds received at Paros.", "The Athenian soldier and statesman, Aristides \"the Just\", is made chief archon of Athens."], "birth": []}, "-488": {"death": [], "event": ["The Athenians ostracise Hipparchos for his favouring of appeasement of the Persians.", "Theron becomes tyrant of Acragas in Sicily."], "birth": []}, "-487": {"death": [], "event": ["The island of Aegina and the city of Athens go to war. The island has earned the enmity of Athens by earlier submitting to the Persians. The Spartan King, Leotychidas, tries unsuccessfully to arrange a truce in the war.", "The Athenian Archonship becomes elective by lot from all the citizens, an important milestone in the move towards radical Athenian democracy. There are nine archons and a secretary. Three of the archons have special functions: the basileus, or sovereign; the polemarch (originally a military commander); and the archon eponymous (chief magistrate), who gave his name to the year."], "birth": ["Gorgias, Greek philosopher (approximate date) (d. c. 376 BC)"]}, "-486": {"death": ["Spurius Cassius Vecellinus, Roman consul (executed)"], "event": ["Egypt revolts against Persian rule upon the death of Darius I. The revolts, probably led by Libyans of the western Delta, are crushed the next year by Xerxes, who reduces Egypt to the status of a conquered province.", "During his third consulate, the Roman consul Spurius Cassius Viscellinus proposes an agrarian law to assist needy plebeians, a measure violently opposed both by the patricians and by the wealthy plebeians, who have Cassius condemned and executed.", "The first part of the Grand Canal of China is built during the reign of King Fuchai of Wu. It links the Yangtze River with the Huai River, and is a measure to ship amble amount of supplies north for intended wars with the northern states of Song and Lu.", "The construction of a relief in the Apadana, a ceremonial complex at Persepolis, is finished. It shows Darius and Xerxes receiving tribute and is now kept in the Iranbustan Museum in Tehran."], "birth": []}, "-485": {"death": ["Darius I, king of Persia (b. c. 549 BC)"], "event": ["Darius I, one of the greatest rulers of the Achaemenid dynasty of Persia, dies and is succeeded by his son, Xerxes I. During this time the Persian empire extends as far west as Macedonia and Libya and as far east as the Hyphasis (Beas) River; it stretches to the Caucasus Mountains and the Aral Sea in the north and to the Persian Gulf and the Arabian Desert in the south.", "Gelo, the tyrant of Gela, takes advantage of an appeal by the descendants of the first colonist of Syracuse, the Gamoroi, who had held power until they were expelled by the Killichiroi, the lower class of the city, and makes himself master of that city, leaving his brother Hieron to control Gela."], "birth": []}, "-484": {"death": ["Wu Zixu, political advisor from Chu who has been employed at the court of the State of Wu during the reign of King Hel\u00fc of Wu; all Chinese people with the surname Wu consider him their first ancestor (b. 526 BC)"], "event": ["Xerxes I quells the Egyptian revolt against Persian rule. He ravages the Delta region in the process and then appoints his brother Achaemenes satrap (governor) of Egypt.", "Despite an attempt at rebellion, the land and city of Babylon remains solidly under Persian rule.", "The Athenian general and statesman, Xanthippus, is ostracised.", "The Athenian playwright, Aeschylus, wins first prize in drama at the Dionysia festival."], "birth": ["Herodotus of Halicarnassus, Greek historian (approximate date) (d. c. 425 BC)", "Achaeus of Eretria, Greek tragedian"]}, "-483": {"death": ["May \u2013 Gautama Buddha, Indian prince, founder of Buddhism"], "event": ["Xerxes I of Persia is encouraged by his cousin and brother-in-law, Mardonius, supported by a strong party of exiled Greeks, to take revenge for the defeat that Darius I suffered at the hands of the Greeks at Marathon in 490 BC. In response, Xerxes prepares for a major expedition to crush the Greeks. To avoid a repeat of the significant losses to the Persian fleet that occurred in 492 BC, Xerxes has a canal cut through the promontory of Mount Athos.", "The Athenian archon Themistocles realises that the Greeks need to be able to beat the Persians at sea. To carry out this strategy, however, Athens needs far more warships (that is to say the newly developed, specialised triremes) than the 70 it has. Themistocles is initially opposed by other Athenian leaders. However, when the state-owned silver mines at Laurium become the site of a rich strike, Themistocles persuades the assembly, instead of \"declaring a dividend,\" to devote the whole surplus to increasing the navy to a proposed 200 ships.", "The Buddhist relics are divided into 8 portions and placed in 8 reliquaries. Each reliquary is then encased in its own burial mound, called stupa. King Ashoka opens the original 8 stupas and divides their relics among many more stupas, probably including the one at Sanchi (approximate date).", "Gelo, the tyrant of Syracuse conquers the nearby Sicilian cities of Euboea and Megara Hyblaea, selling their common people into slavery and bringing their oligarchs to Syracuse."], "birth": []}, "-482": {"death": [], "event": ["The Athenian archon Themistocles secures the ostracism of his opponents and becomes the political leader of Athens. The Athenian soldier and statesman, Aristides, is one of those ostracised due to his opposition to Themistocles' naval policy.", "While King Fuchai of Wu attends a meeting in Huangchi, in an attempt to gain hegemony over all the other duchies of Zhou Dynasty China, his capital city in the State of Wu is captured in a surprise assault by King Goujian of Yue. In 473 BC the State of Wu will finally be annexed by the State of Yue."], "birth": []}, "-481": {"death": ["Sima Niu, the highest ranking aristocrat among the disciples of Confucius"], "event": ["The Persian King Xerxes I arrives at Sardis and begins to build up his great army and navy for the invasion of Greece. Egypt contributes 481 ships.", "The Congress at the Isthmus of Corinth, under the presidency of Sparta, brings together a number of the Greek city states, who agree to the end of the war between Athens and Aegina. They also discuss the threat from the Persians. Athens is unwilling to place her forces under Sparta and its king Leonidas. Gelo, tyrant of Syracuse, wants high command, but Sparta and Athens refuse. However, during the Congress, Gelo has to withdraw due to Carthage's plans to invade Sicily. Finally, Themistocles agrees that Athens' navy serve under a Spartan admiral to achieve the unity of the Greek states. Nevertheless, Thebes and Thessaly are unwilling to support Athens against the Persians and Crete decides to remain neutral.", "The Spring and Autumn Period, which has begun in 722 BC, ends, while the Warring States Period officially begins in 403 BC."], "birth": ["Protagoras, Greek presocratic philosopher (d. c. 420 BC)"]}, "-480": {"death": ["August 11 \u2013 Leonidas I, Agiad King of Sparta (died at Thermopylae)", "Xenophanes, Greek philosopher (b. 570 BCE)", "Hamilcar, Carthaginian general (suicide after his defeat in the Battle of Himera)"], "event": ["May \u2013 King Xerxes I of Persia marches from Sardis and onto Thrace and Macedonia.", "The Greek congress decides to send a force of 10,000 Greeks, including hoplites and cavalry, to the Vale of Tempe, through which they believe the Persian army will pass. The force includes Lacedaemonians led by Euanetos and Athenians under Themistocles. Warned by Alexander I of Macedon that the vale can be bypassed elsewhere and that the army of Xerxes is overwhelming, the Greeks decide not to try to hold there and vacate the vale.", "August 11 \u2013 The Battle of Thermopylae ends in victory for the Persians under Xerxes. His army engulfs a force of 300 Spartans and 700 Thespiae under the Spartan King, Leonidas I. The Greeks under Leonidas resist the advance through Thermopylae of Xerxes' vast army. For two days Leonidas and his troops withstand the Persian attacks; he then orders most of his troops to retreat, and he and his 300-member royal guard fight to the last man.", "A member of the Agiad royal family, and the son of King Cleombrotus and nephew of King Leonidas, Pausanias becomes regent for Leonidas' son, Pleistarchus, after Leonidas I is killed at Thermopylae.", "Phocis and the coasts of Euboea are devastated by the Persians. Thebes and most of Boeotia join Xerxes.", "King Alexander I of Macedon is obliged to accompany Xerxes in a campaign through Greece, though he secretly aids the Greek allies. With Xerxes' apparent acquiescence, Alexander seizes the Greek colony of Pydna and advances his frontiers eastward to the Strymon, taking in Crestonia and Bisaltia, along with the rich silver deposits of Mount Dysorus.", "The Athenian soldier and statesman, Aristides, as well as the former Athenian archon Xanthippus, return from banishment in Aegina to serve under Themistocles against the Persians.", "August \u2013 The Persians achieve a naval victory over the Greeks in an engagement fought near Artemisium, a promontory on the north coast of Euboea. The Greek fleet holds its own against the Persians in three days of fighting but withdraws southward when news comes of the defeat at Thermopylae.", "Breaking through the pass at Thermopylae from Macedonia into Greece, the Persians occupy Attica.", "September 21 \u2013 The Persians sack Athens, whose citizens flee to Salamis and then Peloponnesus.", "September 28 \u2013 The Battle of Salamis brings victory to the Greeks, whose Athenian general Themistocles lures the Persians into the Bay of Salamis, between the Athenian port-city of Piraeus and the island of Salamis. The Greek triremes then attack furiously, ramming or sinking many Persian vessels and boarding others. The Greeks sink about 200 Persian vessels while losing only about 40 of their own. The rest of the Persian fleet is scattered, and as a result Xerxes has to postpone his planned land offensives for a year, a delay that gives the Greek city-states time to unite against him.", "An eclipse of the sun discourages the Greek army from following up the victory of Salamis. Xerxes returns to Persia leaving behind an army under Mardonius, which winters in Thessaly.", "Roman troops march against the Veintes.", "Xerxes encourages the Carthaginians to attack the Greeks in Sicily. Under the Carthaginian military leader, Hamilcar, Carthage sends across a large army.", "The Greek city of Himera in Sicily, in its quarrel with Akragas, enlists Carthaginian support. With the help of Gelo, the tyrant of Syracusae, and Theron of Akragas, the Carthaginians are defeated in the Battle of Himera. After the defeat, Hamilcar kills himself.", "The Imperial treasury at the Persepolis Palace is completed after a building time of thirty years.", "The archaic period of sculpture ends in Greece and is succeeded by the Severe (Early Classical) period (approximate date).", "A sculpture of a Dying warrior is made in the left corner of the east pediment of the Temple of Aphaea in Aegina (approximate date). Today, it is preserved at the Staatliche Antikensammlungen und Glyptothek in Munich, Germany.", "The sculpture of a Kritios Boy is made on Acropolis, Athens (approximate date). It is now preserved in the Acropolis Museum in Athens.", "Work begins on the detail Musicians and Dancers on a wall painting in the Tomb of the Lionesses in Tarquinia. It is finished some ten years later."], "birth": ["Euripides, Greek playwright (d. 406 BCE)", "Antiphon, Attic orator (d. 411 BCE)", "Philolaus, Greek mathematician and philosopher (d. c. 405 BCE)"]}, "-479": {"death": ["August 27 \u2013 Mardonius, Persian general (killed in the Battle of Plataea)", "Confucius, Chinese philosopher (b. 551 BC)", "Ephialtes, betrayer of the Spartans in the Battle of Thermopylae"], "event": ["The Persian commander Mardonius, now based in Thessaly, wins support from Argus and western Arcadia. He tries to win over Athens but fails.", "Mardonius attacks Athens once more and the Athenians are forced to retreat, whereupon he razes the city. The Spartans march north to support Athens against the Persians.", "The Battle of Plataea in Boeotia ends the Persian invasions of Greece as the Persian general Mardonius is routed by the Greeks under Pausanias, nephew of the former Spartan King, Leonidas I. The Athenian contingent is led by the repatriated Aristides. Mardonius is killed in the battle and the Greeks capture enormous amounts of loot. Thebes is captured shortly thereafter and the Theban collaborators executed by Pausanias.", "Meanwhile at sea, the Persians are defeated by a Greek fleet headed by Leotychidas of Sparta and Xanthippus of Athens in the Battle of Mycale, off the coast of Lydia in Asia Minor.", "Potidaea is struck by a tsunami."], "birth": []}, "-478": {"death": ["Gelo, tyrant of the cities of Gela and Syracuse in Sicily"], "event": ["Despite Spartan opposition, Athens is refortified as well as rebuilt after the Persian destruction of the city.", "With the help of the Athenian statesman and general, Cimon, Aristides commands an Athenian fleet of 30 ships that the Spartan commander Pausanias leads to free the Greek cities on Cyprus and capture Byzantium from the Persians and their Phoenician allies.", "While Pausanias is occupying Byzantium, his arrogance and his adoption of Persian clothing and manners offends the allies and raises suspicions of disloyalty. Pausanias is recalled to Sparta, where he is tried and acquitted of the charge of treason, but he is not restored to his command.", "Hiero I (Hieron) becomes the Tyrant of Syracuse following the death of his brother Gelo.", "A Temple of Confucius is established in (modern-day) Qufu."], "birth": []}, "-477": {"death": [], "event": ["The Spartan co-ruler Leotychides and the Athenian leader Themistocles lead a fleet and army to reoccupy northern Greece and to punish the aristocratic family of the Aleuads for having aided the Persians. Leotychides is caught accepting a bribe during the operations in Thessaly.", "Greek maritime cities around the Aegean Sea no longer wish to be under Spartan control and at Delos offer their allegiance, through Aristides, to Athens. They form the Delian League (also known as the Confederacy of Delos) with Cimon as their principal commander.", "Roman forces in a stronghold on the Cremera River are defeated by an army of Veientes from the Etruscan city of Veii in the Battle of the Cremera."], "birth": []}, "-476": {"death": ["Zhou Jing Wang, king of the Chinese Zhou Dynasty"], "event": ["Convicted in Sparta on the charge of accepting a bribe from the Aleudae family whilst leading an expedition to Thessaly against the family for their collaboration with the Persians, the Spartan King Leotychidas flees to the temple of Athena Alea in Tegea, Arcadia. A sentence of exile is passed upon him; his house is razed, and his grandson, Archidamus II, ascends the Spartan throne in his place.", "Cimon of Athens increases his power at the expense of Themistocles. He ousts Pausanias and the Spartans from the area around the Bosporus. The Spartans, hearing that Pausanias is intriguing with the Persians, recall him and he is \"disciplined\".", "Under the leadership of Kimon, the Delian League continues to fight the Persians and to release the Ionian cities from Persian domination. Athens' capture of Eion on the Strymon from the Persians is led by Cimon.", "The Greek poet Pindar visits Sicily and is made welcome at the courts of Theron of Acragas and Hieron I of Syracuse. They commission some of his greatest poetry. It is through these connections that Pindar's reputation spreads all over the Greek world."], "birth": []}, "-475": {"death": ["Heraclitus of Ephesus, Greek philosopher"], "event": ["Cimon leads an Athenian attack on the island of Skyros and expels the indigenous inhabitants who are regarded as pirates.", "Zhou Yuan Wang becomes King of the Zhou Dynasty.", "The painter Polygnotus of Thasos begins his work (approximate date)."], "birth": []}, "-474": {"death": [], "event": ["Hiero I, tyrant of Sicily, allied with Aristodemus, the tyrant of Cumae, defeat the Etruscan navy in the Battle of Cumae as the Etruscans try to capture the Greek city of Cumae in Italy. This victory marks the end of the Etruscan aggression against the Greeks in southern Italy and saves the Greeks of Campania from Etruscan domination.", "Taranto signs an alliance with Rhegion, to counter the Messapii, Peuceti, and Lucanians, but the joint armies of the Tarentines and Rhegines are defeated near Kail\u00eca (modern Ceglie Messapica).", "Hiero builds Castello Aragonese on the island of Ischia.", "King Xerxes I of Persia issues a decree, as dictated by Mordecai upon the king's secretaries, giving the Jews in every city the authority to unite to defend their lives against their opponents in all of the 127 provinces of the Persian Empire, stretching from India to Ethiopia.[1]", "The Greek poet Pindar moves to Thebes after two years at the Sicilian Court of Hiero I of Syracuse. While at Thebes, he composes lyric odes to celebrate triumphs in the Olympic Games and other athletic events."], "birth": []}, "-473": {"death": ["King Fuchai of Wu, the last king of Wu in Zhou Dynasty China"], "event": ["The State of Wu is annexed by the State of Yue.", "The Hikawa Shrine is established in Saitama, Saitama."], "birth": []}, "-472": {"death": [], "event": ["Carystus in Euboea is forced to join the Delian League after the Athenians attack the city (approximate date).", "The tragedy The Persians is produced by Aeschylus. It is the oldest surviving classical Greek play."], "birth": []}, "-471": {"death": [], "event": ["Athenian politician Themistocles loses the confidence of the Athenian people, partly due to his arrogance and partly due to his alleged readiness to take bribes. As a result, he is ostracized and retires to Argos.", "The colony of Pixunte (Pixous) is founded in Magna Graecia."], "birth": ["Thucydides, Greek historian (alleged date, however, 460 BC is more probable) (d. c. 395 BC)"]}, "-470": {"death": ["Pausanias, Spartan commander during the Greco-Persian Wars"], "event": ["Suspected of plotting to seize power in Sparta by instigating a helot uprising, Pausanias takes refuge in the Temple of Athena of the Brazen House to escape arrest. The sanctuary is respected, but the Spartans wall in the sanctuary and starve Pausanias to death.", "The construction of the Temple of Zeus, begins at Olympia, Greece. This includes the relief sculpture (of which fragments now remain at the Archaeological Museum of Olympia) of Apollo with battling Lapiths and centaurs (approximate date).", "The Charioteer, in the Sanctuary of Apollo, Delphi, is created in commemoration of a victory in the Pythian Games of 478 or 474 BC (approximate date). It is now preserved at the Delphi Archaeological Museum.", "Pan Painter makes a \"bell krater\" (an earthenware piece that is used to mix water and wine) which has a red-figure decoration of Artemis slaying Actaeon. It is now preserved at the Museum of Fine Arts in Boston (approximate date)."], "birth": ["Aspasia of Miletus, mistress of Pericles of Athens (d. c. 400 BC)", "Mozi, Chinese philosopher (d. c. 390 BC)"]}, "-469": {"death": ["Zhou Yuan Wang (Ji Ren), King of the Zhou Dynasty of China", "Leotychides, king of Sparta (b. 545 BC)"], "event": ["The island of Naxos wishes to secede from the Delian League, but is blockaded by Athens and forced to surrender. Naxos becomes a tribute-paying member of the Delian League. This action is considered high-handed and resented by the other Greek city states.", "Themistocles, after being exiled from Athens, makes his way across the Aegean to Magnesia, an inland Ionian city under Persian rule."], "birth": ["Socrates, Athenian philosopher (approximate date) (d. 399 BC)"]}, "-468": {"death": ["Aristides, Athenian statesman (b. 530 BC)"], "event": ["Sparta faces trouble near home, chiefly from Arcadia with the support of Argos. Argos regains control of Tiryns.", "Antium is captured by Roman forces.", "Zhou Zhen Ding Wang becomes the twenty-eighth sovereign of the Chinese Zhou Dynasty.", "Sophocles, Greek playwright, defeats Aeschylus for the Athenian Prize."], "birth": []}, "-467": {"death": ["Hiero I, Tyrant of Syracuse"], "event": ["Quintus Fabius Vibulanus becomes consul of the Roman Republic for the first of three times.", "After the death of his brother Hiero I, Thrasybulus becomes Tyrant of Syracuse.", "Aeschylus writes Seven Against Thebes and wins the Dionysia.", "Aeschylus' play, The Persians is produced in Sicily.", "The first recorded sighting of Halley's Comet occurs.[1]"], "birth": []}, "-466": {"death": [], "event": ["Kimon carries the war against Persia into Asia Minor and wins the Battle of the Eurymedon in Pamphylia. This is a decisive defeat of the Persians as Kimon's land and sea forces capture the Persian camp and destroy or capture the entire Persian fleet of 200 triremes (manned by Phoenicians). Many new allies of Athens are now recruited, such as the trading city of Phaselis on the Lycian-Pamphylian border.", "The Tyrant, Thrasybulus, is driven out by the citizens of Syracuse, Sicily. The city moves to a democratic system of government.", "The Greek colony of Taras, in Magna Graecia, is defeated by the native population of Apulia. As a result, the Tarentine monarchy falls, with the installation of a democracy."], "birth": []}, "-465": {"death": ["Xerxes I, king of Persia (murdered) (b. c. 519 BC)", "King Goujian of Yue, king of the Chinese State of Yue"], "event": ["King Xerxes I of the Persian Empire, together with his eldest son, is murdered by one of his Ministers, Artabanus the Hyrcanian. The Persian general, Megabyzus, is thought to have been one of the conspirators in the assassination.", "Artabanus gains control of the Achaemenid state for several months. However, he is betrayed by Megabyzus and is killed by Xerxes' son, Artaxerxes.", "Thasos revolts from the Delian League. The revolt arises from rivalry over trade with the Thracian hinterland and, in particular, over the ownership of a gold mine. Athens under Kimon lays siege to Thasos after the Athenian fleet defeats the Thasos fleet.", "Tholos, west side of Ancient Agora of Athens, is built (approximate date).", "Phidias begins producing the sculpture called The Athena Promachos (The Defender) and completes it ten years later."], "birth": []}, "-464": {"death": [], "event": ["Sparta suffers the effects of a severe earthquake leading to a large loss of life.", "When the Messenian helots (serfs) revolt against their Spartan masters following the severe earthquake, King Archidamus II organises the defence of Sparta. The helots fortify themselves at Mount Ithome.", "Egypt seizes the opportunity created by the murder of Xerxes I to revolt against Persia. The revolt is led by Inaros, a Libyan, who gains control of the Delta region and is aided by the Athenians.", "Artaxerxes I succeeds Xerxes as king of the Persian empire."], "birth": ["Herodotus, Greek historian (approximate birthdate)"]}, "-463": {"death": [], "event": ["The Senate and People of Rome appoint Gaius Aemilius Mamercus dictator.", "In Athens, the democratic statesman Ephialtes and the young Pericles attempt to get the oligarchic Kimon ostracized for allegedly receiving bribes. Kimon is charged by Pericles and other democratic politicians with having been bribed not to attack the King of Macedonia (who may have been suspected of covertly helping the Thasian rebels). Though Kimon is acquitted, his influence on the Athenian people is waning.", "Themistocles, who is in exile, approaches the Persian King Artaxerxes I seeking Persian help in regaining power in Athens. Artaxerxes is unwilling to help him, but instead gives him the satrapy of Magnesia.", "After a two year siege, Thasos falls to the Athenians under Kimon who compels the Thasians to destroy their walls, surrender their ships, pay an indemnity and an annual contribution to Athens."], "birth": []}, "-462": {"death": [], "event": ["The Spartans try to conquer the mountain stronghold of Mt Ithome in Messenia, where a large force of rebellious helots have taken refuge. They ask their allies from the Persian Wars, including the Athenians, to help.", "Kimon seeks the support of Athens' citizens to providing help to Sparta. Although Ephialtes maintains that Sparta is Athens' rival for power and should be left to fend for itself, Kimon's view prevails. Kimon then leads 4,000 hoplites to Mount Ithome.", "After an attempt to storm Mt. Ithome fails, the Spartans start to distrust the Athenians over concerns that they may take the side of the helots. Retaining their other allies, the Spartans sent Kimon and his men home. This insulting rebuff causes the collapse of Kimon's popularity at Athens. Outrage over the dismissal swings Athenian opinion towards Ephialtes' views.", "Ephialtes passes a law in the Athenian ecclesia, which reforms the Areopagus, limiting its power to judging cases of homicide and religious crimes. He considers the Areopagus to be the centre of conservatism and Ephialtes' victory is seen as a defeat for the conservatives and the members of the oligarchy.", "Argos, taking advantage of Spartan preoccupation with the revolt of its helots, finally conquers Mycenae. The inhabitants of the town are dispersed, with some finding their way into Macedonia.", "Pericles starts to effectively be the leader of Athens.", "The Greek philosopher, Anaxagoras, moves to Athens and begins teaching there."], "birth": []}, "-461": {"death": ["Ephialtes, leader of the radical democrats in Athens (assassinated)"], "event": ["In Athens, Ephialtes and Pericles finally get agreement to the ostracism of Kimon, who had become unpopular for his unsuccessful pro-Spartan policy.", "Ephialtes, with the support of Pericles, reduces the power of the Athenian Council of Areopagus (filled with ex-archons and so a stronghold of oligarchy) and transfers them to the people, i.e. the Council of Five Hundred, the Assembly and the popular law courts. The office of Judge is made a paid position and is recruited by lot from a list to which every citizen can have his name added.", "Ephialtes is murdered by Aristodicus of Tanagra in Boeotia, who is said to have acted on behalf of members of the Athenian oligarchy.", "The ostracism of Kimon and the murder of Ephialtes leave Pericles as the most influential orator in Athens."], "birth": []}, "-460": {"death": ["Epicharmus, Greek poet (b. 550 BC)", "Panini, Hindu Indian grammarian (b. 520 BC)", "Themistocles, Athenian politician and naval strategist (b. 525 BC)", "Achaemenes, Persian satrap (governor) of Egypt", "Publius Valerius Publicola, Roman consul"], "event": ["Egypt revolts against Persian rule. The Egyptian leader, Inaros, asks Athens for assistance, which is willingly provided as Athens has plans to trade with and colonise Egypt. A force of 200 Athenian triremes, which is campaigning in Cyprus, is immediately ordered to Egypt to render assistance.", "Achaemenes, Persian satrap (governor) of Egypt, is defeated and slain in a battle at Papremis, on the banks of the Nile River, by Egyptian forces.", "The construction of the ceremonial complex of Apadana (the audience hall of Darius I and Xerxes I) in Persepolis is completed.", "The First Peloponnesian War breaks out between the Delian League (led by Athens) and a Peloponnesian alliance (led by Sparta), caused in part by Athens' alliance with Megara and Argos and the subsequent reaction of Sparta. The Athenians have built long walls for the Megarans to their port at Nisaea, thereby earning the enmity of Megara's old rival Corinth.", "Argos rises against Sparta. Athens supports Argos and Thessaly. The small force that is sent by Sparta to quell the uprising in Argos is defeated by a joint Athenian and Argos force at Oenoe. (Battle of Oenoe)", "Conflicts arise between the Roman patricians and plebians. There is also a revolt by Rome's slaves. During the revolt, the Campidoglio is held by the slaves for a lengthy period, along with the most important temples of Rome. It is during this revolt that consul Publius Valerius Publicola dies. The revolt only ends with the arrival of an army from Tusculum, led by Tusculan dictator Lucius Mamilius. Meanwhile, Lucius Quinctius Cincinnatus is appointed as consul to replace Publicola.", "Ducetius, a Hellenised leader of the Siculi, an ancient people of Sicily, takes advantage of the confusion that follows the collapse of the tyranny in Syracuse and other Sicilian states. With the support of the Syracusan democracy, he drives out the colonists of the former tyrant Hieron from Catana and restores it to its original inhabitants.", "Polygnotos of Thasos decorates the Painted Stoa, on the north side of Ancient Agora of Athens (approximate date).", "The construction of a sculpture of a Young Warrior (subsequently found in the sea off Riace, Italy) is begun and completed approximately ten years later. It is now preserved at the Museo Archeologico Nazionale, Reggio Calabria, Italy.", "The sculpture Apollo with battling Lapiths and centaurs is built on the west pediment of the Temple of Zeus in Olympia (approximate date). Only fragments remain and are today preserved at the Archaeological museum in Olympia.", "A metope relief of Athena, Heracles and Atlas are made on a frieze in the Temple of Zeus in Olympia (approximate date). It is now preserved at the Archaeological museum in Olympia.", "A statue of Apollo is cast (approximate date), of which today remains one leg, preserved at the Louvre, and the head, known as the Chatsworth Head, preserved at the British Museum."], "birth": ["Democritus of Abdera, Greek philosopher (d. 370 BC)", "Hippocrates of Cos, Greek physician (d. 377 BC)", "Thucydides, Greek historian (d. 395 BC)"]}, "-459": {"death": [], "event": ["The Jewish priest Ezra assembles and leads a band of approximately 5,000 Jews from Babylon to Jerusalem.", "Athens allies itself with the city state of Megara which is under pressure from Corinth. This alliance leads to war between Corinth and Athens. The first battle of the war, at Haliesis in the Gulf of Argolis, results in a Corinthian victory, but the next battle, at Cecryphalea (modern Angistrion), goes Athens' way.", "The Aequi occupy Tusculum. In response to the threat, the Roman Senate decide to send an army to help the allied city, under the command of consul Lucius Cornelius Maluginensis. In addition, the consul Fabius Vibulanus, who was at that point besieging Antium, moves his forces to attack Tusculum. The Tusculans are able to recapture their city. A truce is then arranged with the Aequi.", "The Sicilian town of Morgantina is destroyed by Ducetius, hellenised leader of the Siculi (according to Diodorus Siculus)."], "birth": []}, "-458": {"death": ["Pleistarchus, King of Sparta since 480 BC"], "event": ["Pleistoanax succeeds his father Pleistarchus as king of Sparta.", "Pericles continues Ephialtes' democratising activities by making the archonship a paid office and the lower class of Athenian citizens eligible to hold the office.", "The Athenians start constructing the Long Walls to protect the route from their city to the port city of Piraeus.", "Aegina joins the Peloponnesian alliance, but their combined fleet is defeated by the Athenians in the Battle of Aegina. The Athenians, under the command of Leosthenes, land on the island of Aegina and besiege and defeat the city. Aegina is forced to pay tribute to Athens.", "The Roman general Lucius Quinctius Cincinnatus is summoned by the Roman Senate to defend the city from attack by the approaching Aequi. He is named dictator of Rome for six months. He goes on to defeat the enemy in a single day at the Battle of Mons Algidus and celebrates a triumph in Rome. Sixteen days after the battle, he resigns his dictatorship and returns to his farm.", "The Athenian playwright Aeschylus completes his trilogy The Oresteia (which comprise Agamemnon, Choephoroi (The Libation Bearers) and The Eumenides)."], "birth": []}, "-457": {"death": [], "event": ["Artaxerxes I decrees that the city government of Jerusalem be re-established.[1]", "Athens, the leader of the Delian League, comes into conflict with Corinth and its ally Sparta (leader of the Peloponnesian League) over Megara. Nicodemes of Sparta, regent for King Pleistoanax, leads an army of 11,500 hoplites into Boeotia to help Thebes put down a rebellion by Phocis.", "Athenian forces block the routes back to the Peloponnese, so the Spartans decide to remain in Boeotia and await the Athenian attack. The Athenians and their allies, with 14,000 men under the command of Myronides, meet the Spartans at Battle of Tanagra. The Spartans win the battle, but they lose many men and so are unable to follow up on their victory.", "The Athenians regroup after the battle and march into Boeotia. Led by Myronides, the Athenians defeat the Boeotians in the Battle of Oenophyta, and then destroy the walls of Tanagra and ravage Locris and Phocis.", "Athens goes on to defeat Aegina later in the year, and to finish the construction of the Long Walls to the Athenian port of Piraeus (an action opposed by Sparta).", "Boeotia, Phocis and Opuntian Locris become members of the Delian League. Athens now has enrolled in the Delian League all the Boeotian cities except Thebes. Aegina is forced to become a member of the League. It is assessed, with Thasos, for a yearly contribution to the League of 30 talents.", "The Zeus Temple at Olympia is completed. The forty-foot statue of Zeus inside it becomes one of the Seven Wonders of the Ancient World."], "birth": []}, "-456": {"death": ["Aeschylus, Greek playwright (b. 525 BC)"], "event": ["The first of the Athenian sculptor Phidias' monuments to Athena, the bronze Athena Promachos, is placed on the Athenian Acropolis. It measures about 9 metres high and is the largest statue yet to be erected in Athens.", "The temple of Zeus in Olympia is finished."], "birth": ["Aristophanes, Greek playwright (d. c. 386 BC)"]}, "-455": {"death": [], "event": ["Athens, under Athenian general Tolmides, sends 100 ships around the Peloponnesus and they set fire to the Spartan naval base at Gythion. As a result, Athens gains the agreement of the Achaean cities to join the Delian League. Athenian forces then go on to attack the Spartan allies on the Corinthian Gulf. Athens is now able to confine Sparta to the southern Peloponnesus.", "The Athenians suffer a severe defeat in Egypt at the hands of the Persians. After being cut off in the Nile Delta, the Athenian fleet is defeated, and the Athenian army retreats across the Sinai Desert to Byblos before its remnants are rescued. The Egyptian rebel Inaros is crucified by the Persians. The Athenians decide against any further military activity in Egypt.", "Euripides presents his earliest known tragedy, Peliades, in the Athenian festival of Dionysia."], "birth": []}, "-454": {"death": [], "event": ["Persian rule in Egypt is finally restored by Megabyzus, satrap of Syria, after a prolonged struggle which has included dealing with a military intervention by Athens. The leader of the revolt, Inaros, is crucified by the Persians.", "Pericles leads a naval expedition in the Corinthian Gulf, in which Athens defeats Achaea. He then attacks Sicyon and Acarnania, after which he unsuccessfully tries to take Oeniadea on the Corinthian Gulf, before returning to Athens.", "Pericles declares that the Delian League's considerable treasury at Delos is not safe from the Persian navy and has the treasury transferred to Athens, thus strengthening Athens' power over the League.", "The treasury of the Delian League is moved from Delos to Athens.", "The Roman Plebs, suffering from a number of economic and financial ills, force the city\u2019s patricians to begin the reform and codification of the law. As a first act, a three-man commission is sent to Athens to study that city's laws.", "Hostilities between Segesta and Selinunte, two Greek cities on Sicily, take place over access to the Tyrrhenian Sea."], "birth": []}, "-453": {"death": [], "event": ["Pericles, the ruler of Athens, bestows generous wages on all Athens' citizens who serve as jurymen on the Heliaia (the supreme court of Athens).", "Achaea, on the southern shore of the Corinthian Gulf, becomes part of what is effectively now the Athenian Empire. The Delian League had changed from an alliance into an empire clearly under the control of Athens.", "The Chinese city of Jinyang is severely flooded in the Battle of Jinyang, where the elite families of Jin, Zhao, Zhi, Wei, and Han, fight. The Wei and the Han swap allegiances to side with Zhao and eliminate the Zhi house."], "birth": []}, "-452": {"death": [], "event": [], "birth": []}, "-451": {"death": [], "event": ["The Persian fleet moves against a rebellious Cyprus to restore order. Kimon, who returns to favour, though not to power, in Athens, plans an expedition to help Cyprus. He gains Pericles' support.", "An Athenian law sponsored by Pericles is passed giving citizenship only to those born of Athenian parents. This marks an end to the policy where residents who were from other cities could be given an honourable status.", "Hostilities among the Greek states come to a formal end with the agreement to the Five Years' Truce. Kimon negotiates the five years' truce with Sparta, in which Athens agrees to abandon its alliance with Argos, while Sparta promises to give up its alliance with Thebes. During the same year Argos signs the first \"Thirty-Years Peace\" with Sparta.", "Following the report of a three-man commission into the design of Roman law, the patricians set up in Rome a Board of Ten, the Decemviri. The first Decemviri, composed entirely of patricians is led by consuls Appius Claudius Crassus and Titus Genucius Augurinus. The first ten codes of the Roman Law of the Twelve Tables are completed by the first Decemvirate."], "birth": []}, "-450": {"death": ["Cimon, Athenian statesman and general (b. c. 510 BC)", "Alexander I, king of Macedonia (approximate date)"], "event": ["Athenian general Cimon sails to Cyprus with two hundred triremes of the Delian League. From there, he sends sixty ships to Egypt to help the Egyptians under Amyrtaeus, who is fighting the Persians in the Nile Delta. Cimon uses the remaining ships to aid an uprising of the Cypriot Greek city-states against Persian control of the island. Cimon lays siege to the Persians stronghold of Citium on the south west coast of Cyprus. However, the siege fails and Cyprus remains under Phoenician (and Persian) control.", "During the siege Cimon dies and the command of the fleet is given to Anaxicrates, who leaves Citium to engage the Phoenician fleet in the Battle of Salamis in Cyprus. The Greek fleet is victorious against the Persians and their allies and then returns to Athens.", "The Athenians reduce the tribute due from their subject city-states (ie members of the Delian League), and each city is allowed to issue its own coinage.", "5,000 talents are transferred to the treasury of the Delian League in Athens.", "The Temple of Theseus is completed in Athens.", "Perdiccas II succeeds Alexander I as king of Macedonia (approximate date).", "The success of the first Decemvirate prompts the appointment of a second Decemvirate which also includes plebians amongst its members. This second decemviri adds two more headings to their predecessor's ten, completing the Law of the Twelve Tables (Lex Duodecim Tabularum), which will form the centrepiece of Roman law for the next several centuries. Nevertheless, this Decemvirate's rule becomes increasingly violent and tyrannical.", "After minor preliminary successes (including the capture of Inessa from its Greek colonists), Ducetius, a Hellenised leader of the Siculi, an ancient people of Sicily, is decisively defeated by the combined forces of Syracuse and Acragas. Ducetius flees to exile in Corinth.", "The Severe (Early Classical) period of sculpture ends in Ancient Greece and is succeeded by the Mature Classical period (approximate date).", "Polykleitos of Argos develops a set of rules (The Canon) for constructing the ideal human figure (approximate date).", "Polygnotos of Thasos ceases his work (approximate date).", "The old bouleuterion, the west side of the agora in Athens, is built (approximate date).", "Polykleitos starts making the bronze statue Achilles (also known as The Spear Bearer or Doryphoros), which he finishes about ten years later. A Roman copy of the original bronze is now kept in the Museo Archeologico Nazionale in Naples, Italy (approximate date).", "The grave stela from Paros, Little girl with a bird, is made. It is now kept at The Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York (approximate date).", "The statue Woman and maid in the style of Achilles Painter, white-ground and black-figure decoration on a lekythos, with additional painting in tempera, starts being made (finished about ten years later). It is now kept at the Museum of Fine Arts in Boston (approximate date).", "Myron makes a bronze statue called The Discus Thrower (Discobolus). A Roman copy is now kept at Museo Nazionale Romano, Rome (approximate date).", "The Corinthian order makes its first appearance in Greek architecture (approximate date).", "The red-figure decorations A Painter, Assistants Crowned by Athena and Victories are made on a hydria in Athens. They are now kept in a private collection (approximate date)."], "birth": ["Alcibiades, Athenian general and politician (d. 404 BC)"]}, "-449": {"death": ["Appius Claudius Crassus, former decemvir (suicide)"], "event": ["The Greek city-states make peace with the Persian Empire through the Peace of Callias, named after the chief Greek ambassador to the Persian Court, an Athenian who is a brother-in-law of Cimon. Athens agrees to end its support for the Egyptians rebels still holding out in parts of the Nile Delta, while the Persians agree not to send ships of war into the Aegean Sea. Athens now effectively controls all the Greek city states in Ionia.", "Pericles begins a great building plan including the re-fortification of Piraeus and its long walls extending to Athens.", "Pericles proposes a \"Congress Decree\" allowing the use of 9,000 talents to finance the massive rebuilding program of Athenian temples. This leads to a meeting (\"Congress\") of all Greek states in order to consider the question of rebuilding the temples destroyed by the Persians. The Congress fails because of Sparta's opposition.", "Pericles places the Athenian sculptor Phidias in charge of all the artistic aspects of his reconstruction program. Construction begins on the Temple of Hephaestus in Athens, while the Athenian Senate commissions Callicrates to construct a temple to Athena Nike on the Acropolis.", "The Second Sacred War erupts between Athens and Sparta, when Sparta forcefully detaches Delphi from Phocis and renders it independent.", "The Law of the Twelve Tables (developed by the Decemvirates) is formally promulgated. The Twelve Tables are literally drawn up on twelve ivory tablets which are posted in the Forum Romanum so that all Romans can read and know them.", "When the Decemvirate's term of office expires, the decemviri refuse to leave office or permit successors to take office. Appius Claudius Crassus is said to have made an unjust decision which would have forced a young woman named Verginia into prostitution, prompting her father to kill her. This leads to an uprising against the Decemvirate forcing the decemviri to resign their offices. The ordinary magistrates (magistratus ordinarii) are re-instituted. Appius Claudius is said to have committed suicide as a result of these events.", "Herodotus completes his History, which records the events concerning the Persian War."], "birth": []}, "-448": {"death": [], "event": ["Pericles leads the Athenian army against Delphi to restore the sanctuary of the oracle of Delphi to Phocis.", "The Athenians begin constructing the middle component of the Long Walls from their city to the port city of Piraeus."], "birth": []}, "-447": {"death": [], "event": ["Pericles leads Athenian forces in the expulsion of barbarians from the Thracian peninsula of Gallipoli, in order to establish Athenian colonists in the region. Thus Pericles starts a policy of kleruchos or \"out-settlements\". This is a form of colonisation where poor and unemployed people are assisted to emigrate to new regions.", "A revolt breaks out in Boeotia as the oligarchs of Thebes conspire against the democratic faction in the city. The Athenians, under their general Tolmides, with 1000 hoplites plus other troops from their allies, march into Boeotia to take back the towns revolting against Athenian control. They capture Chaeronea, but are attacked and defeated by the Boeotians at Coronea. As a result, the Athenians are forced to give up control of Boeotia as well as Phocis and Locris, which all fall under the control of hostile oligarchs who quit the Delian League.", "The middle component of the Long Walls from Athens to the port city of Piraeus is completed.", "Achaeus of Eretria, a Greek playwright, produces his first play.", "Pericles commissions the architects Kallikrates and Iktinos to design a larger temple for the Parthenon and the construction begins on rebuilding the great temple of Athena (the Parthenon) on the Acropolis at Athens soon afterwards."], "birth": []}, "-446": {"death": [], "event": ["Achaea achieves its independence from Athens, while Euboea, crucial to Athenian control of the sea and food supplies, revolts against Athens. Pericles crosses over to Euboea with his troops.", "Megara joins the revolt against Athens. The strategic importance of Megara is immediately demonstrated by the appearance, for the first time in 12 years, of a Spartan army under King Pleistoanax in Attica. The threat from the Spartan army leads Pericles to arrange, by bribery and by negotiation, that Athens will give up its mainland possessions and confine itself to a largely maritime empire.", "The Spartan army retires, so Pericles crosses back to Euboea with 50 ships and 5,000 soldiers, cracking down any opposition. He punishes the landowners of Chalcis, who lose their properties, while the residents of Istiaia are uprooted and replaced by 2,000 Athenian settlers.", "After hearing that the Spartan army had accepted bribes from Pericles, Pleistoanax, the King of Sparta, is impeached by the citizens of Sparta, but flees to exile in Arcadia. His military adviser, Cleandridas also flees and is condemned to death in his absence.", "Ducetius, the Hellenised leader of the Siculi, an ancient people of Sicily, returns from exile in Corinth to Sicily and colonises Cale Acte on the north coast with Greek and Siculi settlers.", "In the Battle of Corbione, Titus Quinctius Capitolinus Barbatus leads Roman troops to a victory over the Aequi of north-east Latium and the Volsci of southern Latium."], "birth": ["Aristophanes, Greek playwright (approximate year) (d. c. 385 BC)", "Marcus Furius Camillus, Roman soldier and statesman (traditional date) (d. 365 BC)"]}, "-445": {"death": [], "event": ["Pericles, concerned over the draining effect of years of war on Athenian manpower, looks for peace with the support of the Assembly. Athenian diplomat, Callias, goes to Sparta and after much bargaining arranges a peace treaty with Sparta and her Peloponnesian allies, thus extending the 5 years truce of 451 BC for another 30 years. According to this treaty, Megara is to be returned to the Peloponnesian League, Troezen and Achaea become independent, Aegina is to become a tributary to Athens but autonomous, and disputes are to be settled by arbitration. Each party agrees to respect the alliances of the other.", "The Temple of Poseidon is completed south of Athens at Cape Sunion.", "Nehemiah, the Jewish cup-bearer to Artaxerxes I at Susa, is given permission by Artaxerxes to return to Jerusalem as governor of Judea, in order to rebuild parts of it (Nehemiah 2:5\u20138).", "A new law, the Lex Canuleia removes the ban on inter-marriage of the Roman classes, i.e. plebeian with patrician."], "birth": ["Antisthenes, Athenian philosopher (d. c. 365 BC)"]}, "-444": {"death": [], "event": ["The conservative and democratic factions in Athens confront each other. The ambitious new leader of the conservatives, Thucydides, accuses the leader of the democratic faction, Pericles, of profligacy and criticises the way Pericles is spending money on his ambitious building plans for the city. Thucydides manages, initially, to gain the support of the ecclesia. Pericles responds by proposing to reimburse the city for all the expenses from his private property, on the condition that he would make the inscriptions of dedication in his own name. His stance is supported by the ecclesia, so Thucydides' efforts to dislodge Pericles from power are defeated."], "birth": []}, "-443": {"death": ["Pindar, Greek poet (b. 522 BC)"], "event": ["No consuls are elected in Rome, but rather military tribunes with consular power are appointed in their stead. While only patricians could be consuls, some military tribunes were plebeians. These positions had responsibility for the census, a vital function in the financial administration of Rome. So to stop the plebeians from possibly gaining control of the census, the patricians remove from the consuls and tribunes the right to take the census, and rather entrust it to two magistrates, called censores who were to be chosen exclusively from the patricians in Rome.", "Pericles founds the colony of Thurii near the site of the former city of Sybaris, in southern Italy. Its colonists include Herodotus and Lysias."], "birth": []}, "-442": {"death": ["Zhou zhen ding wang, King of the Zhou Dynasty of China"], "event": ["As a result of his failure to effectively challenge Pericles, the Athenian citizens ostracise Thucydides for 10 years and Pericles is once again unchallenged in Athenian politics.", "Sophocles writes Antigone."], "birth": []}, "-441": {"death": ["Zhou ai wang, King of the Zhou Dynasty of China"], "event": ["Zhou ai wang becomes King of the Zhou Dynasty of China but dies before the year's end, to be succeeded by Zhou si wang.", "The Greek playwright, Euripides, wins his first victory in a dramatic festival.", "The Greek playwright Sophocles writes Antigone."], "birth": []}, "-440": {"death": ["Ducetius, a Hellenized leader of the Sicels and founder of a united Sicilian state"], "event": ["Samos, an autonomous member of the Delian League and one of Athens' principal allies with a substantial fleet of its own, quarrels with Miletus and appeals to Athens for assistance. Pericles decides in favour of Miletus, so Samos revolts. Pericles then sails to Samos with a fleet to overthrow its oligarchic government and install a democratic one. Sparta threatens to interfere. However, at a congress of the Peloponnesian League, its members vote not to intervene on behalf of Samos against Athens.", "A famine strikes in Rome.", "Zhou kao wang becomes King of the Zhou Dynasty of China.", "Democritus proposes the existence of indivisible particles, which he calls atoms.", "Polykleitos completes one of his greatest statues, the Doryphorus (The Spear Bearer) (approximate date).", "The stela, Demeter, Persephone and Triptolemos, from Eleusis, is made (approximate date). It is now kept at the National Archaeological Museum of Athens.", "A temple for Poseidon is erected in Sounion."], "birth": []}, "-439": {"death": [], "event": ["As a result of Persian assistance to Samos, it takes the Athenian army nine months to successfully complete its siege of Samos and force the Samians to surrender. Samos becomes a tributary of Athens.", "Spurius Maelius, a wealthy Roman plebeian, tries to buy popular support with the aim of making himself king. During the severe famine affecting Rome, he buys up a large store of grain and sells it at a low price to the people of Rome \u2013 the first time this had been done in Rome. This leads Lucius Minucius, the patrician praefectus annonae (\"president of the market\"), to accuse Maelius of seeking to take over the government.", "Maelius is summoned before Cincinnatus (who has again become dictator of the Roman Republic, to put down a revolt by the plebeians), but refuses to appear. Shortly thereafter, Maelius is killed by Gaius Servilius Ahala and his house is burnt to the ground."], "birth": []}, "-438": {"death": ["Cincinnatus, Roman politician, consul and dictator (b. 519 BC)"], "event": ["The Parthenon on the Acropolis at Athens is completed by Ictinus and Callicrates and is consecrated after 9 years of construction. It is dedicated at the Panathenaea (a festival held in honour of Athena every four years on the Acropolis).", "The colossal statue of the Athena Parthenos, which Phidias has made for the Parthenon, is completed and dedicated. It is made of gold and ivory and stands some 12 metres high.", "Telephus, a play by the renowned playwright Euripides, is produced in Athens. This tragedy did not survive to modern times.", "The city of Capua falls to the Samnites.", "The Greek playwright Euripides' play Alcestis is performed in the Dionysia, an Athenian dramatic festival.", "Three seated Goddesses (possibly Hestia, Dione and Aphrodite), from the east pediment of the Parthenon, are made (finished in 432 BC). They are now kept at The British Museum in London.", "The Ionic frieze on the north side of the Parthenon, is created (finished in 432 BC). Parts of this frieze are now preserved in museums in Europe, including the Horsemen (at the British Museum, London), and the Marshals and Young Women (now at Mus\u00e9e du Louvre, Paris), which once formed part of the Procession on the frieze."], "birth": []}, "-437": {"death": [], "event": ["Pericles, concerned for Athenian trade with Greek settlements to the East, and in order to counteract a new and possibly threatening Thracian\u2013Scythian alliance, leads Athens' fleet to Pontus on the Black Sea and establishes friendly relations with the Greek cities of the region.", "Mnesikles starts to build Propylaia, Acropolis, Athens. The work is canceled in 432 BC, due to the Peloponnesian war, and thus is never finished."], "birth": []}, "-436": {"death": ["Zengcius, Chinese philosopher (b. 505 BC)"], "event": ["Following Pericles' visit to the Black Sea, a large Athenian colony is founded at Amphipolis. This is disconcertingly close to an outpost of Corinthian influence at Potidaea in the Chalcidice. Corinth feels it is being indirectly pressured by Athens."], "birth": ["Isocrates, Athenian orator (d. 338 BC)", "Artaxerxes II, king of Persia (approximate date) (d. 358 BC)"]}, "-435": {"death": [], "event": ["A dispute arises between Epidamnus' oligarchs and democratic forces in the Greek colony. Most of the colony's inhabitants originate from Corinth or Corcyra (Corfu). Epidamnus' oligarchs are exiled and then appeal to Corcyra for help, while the democrats enlist the support of Corinth. Corcyra is then attacked by Corinth as the dispute heats up.", "A gold and ivory statue of Zeus, king of the gods, is completed at Elis by the Athenian sculptor Phidias for the Temple of Zeus at Olympia. The statue becomes one of the Seven Wonders of the World. The Olympian Zeus is about seven times life size (or 13 metres) and occupies the full height of the temple."], "birth": ["Philoxenus of Cythera, Greek dithyrambic poet (d. 380 BC)"]}, "-434": {"death": [], "event": ["Under the leadership of Pericles, Athens introduces a series of measures (the \"Megarian decree\") imposing an economic embargo on Megara for violations of land sacred to Demeter. According to the provisions of the decree, Megarian merchants are to be excluded from the market of Athens and the ports in its empire. This ban strangles the Megarian economy and strains the fragile peace between Athens and Sparta, which is allied with Megara.", "Philip, brother of Perdiccas II of Macedon challenges Perdiccas for the throne, and enlists the support of Athens and King Derdas of Elimea. Perdiccas responds by stirring up rebellion in a number of Athenian tribute cities, including Potidaea.", "Anaxagoras is arrested by Pericles' political opponents on a charge of contravening the established dogmas of Athenian religion. It needs Pericles' power of oratory and persuasion to secure his release. Even so he is fined and forced to retire from Athens to Lampsacus in Ionia.", "While in prison, Anaxagoras tries to square the circle with straightedge and compasses."], "birth": []}, "-433": {"death": ["May 3 \u2013 Zeng Hou Yi, marquis of the state of Zeng, subordinate to Chu"], "event": ["Pericles concludes a defensive alliance with Corcyra (Corfu), the strong naval power in the Ionian Sea, which is the bitter enemy of Corinth. As a result, Athens intervenes in the dispute between Corinth and Corcyra, and, at the Battle of Sybota, a small contingent of Athenian ships play a critical role in preventing a Corinthian fleet from capturing Corcyra. Following this, Athens places Potidaea, a tributary ally of Athens but a colony of Corinth, under siege.", "The Corinthians, upset by Athens' actions, lobbies Sparta to take action against Athens. This appeal is backed by Megara (which is being severely affected by Pericles' economic sanctions) and by Aegina (which is being heavily taxed by Pericles and which has been refused home rule).", "Pericles renews alliances with the Rhegium on the south west corner of Italy and Leontini in south-east Sicily, threatening Sparta's food supply route from Sicily.", "A set of sixty-five bells, from the Tomb of Marquis Yi of Zeng (Zhou dynasty) in Suixian, Hubei, is made. It is now preserved at the Hubei Provincial Museum in Wuhan."], "birth": []}, "-432": {"death": [], "event": ["Sparta calls and hosts a conference of the Peloponnesian League. The conference is attended by Athenian representatives as well as members of the League. Following arguments by Corinth against Athens, a majority of the League members vote to declare that the Athenians had broken the peace.", "The Athenian admiral, Phormio, continues the siege of Potidaea by blocking the entrance to the Gulf of Corinth. Meanwhile an Athenian fleet, led by Archestratus, sails for Potidaea. However, instead of attacking Potidaea, they attack the Macedonians under Perdiccas II, who have allied with the Potidaeans. The Athenians capture Therma (modern Thessalonica) and then go on to besiege Pydna. However, as the Athenians are besieging Pydna, they receive news that Corinth has sent a force under the command of Aristeus to support Potidaea. In response, Athens sends more troops and ships under the command of Hipponicus. The combined Athenian force sails to Potidaea and lands there. In the ensuing Battle of Potidaea, the Athenians are victorious against Corinth and its allies.", "The Greek colony of Heraclea in Southern Italy is founded by colonists from Tarentum and Thurii.", "The Chinese Marquis Yi of Zeng is buried (approximate date) with lavish tomb items including a 65 set of bronze bells (bianzhong) with five octave musical scale and two musical tones that can be produced by each bell. Marquis Yi was from the State of Chu during the Warring States phase of the Zhou Dynasty.", "Meton of Athens, a Greek mathematician and astronomer, calculates accurately the comparative chronology of the solar and lunar cycles. As a result, he introduces the 19-year Metonic cycle into the Athenian calendar as a method of calculating dates. Working with Euctemon, he observes the summer solstice on 27 June.", "Pheidias completes the sculptures that form the decoration of the Parthenon in Athens."], "birth": ["Dionysius, tyrant of Syracuse (d. 367 BC) (approximate birth date)"]}, "-431": {"death": [], "event": ["Athens enters into an alliance with King Sitalkes of Thrace, after Nymphodorus, an influential Athenian, marries Sitalkes' sister. Nymphodorus then negotiates an agreement between Athens and Macedon's King Perdiccas II, through which Perdiccas regains Therma. As a result, Athens withdraws its support for Perdiccas' brother, Philip, and the Thracians promise to assist Perdiccas in capturing him. In return, Perdiccas marches on the Chalcidians, the people he has originally persuaded to revolt.", "A Theban raid on Plataea, the only pro-Athenian city in Boeotia, is a failure and the Plataeans take 180 prisoners and put them to death. Athens supports Plataea while Sparta aligns itself with Thebes. Sparta enlists the help of the Greek cities in Italy and Sicily. Both Sparta and Athens appeal to Persia, but without result.", "The Spartans, led by King Archidamus II, invade Attica effectively starting the Second Peloponnesian War between the Athenian Empire and the Peloponnesian League. The Spartans lay waste to the countryside around Athens. Athenian leader, Pericles, does not seriously oppose them, rather withdrawing the rural population of the country districts within Athens' city walls. Instead, he pursues active naval warfare and reduces any danger from the island of Aegina by replacing its native population with Athenians.", "The Romans defeat the Aequi and the Volsci at the battle of the River Algidus.", "The Greek physician and philosopher Empedocles articulates the notion that the human body has four humours: blood, bile, black bile, and phlegm, a belief which dominates medical thinking for centuries.", "Euripides' play Medea wins third prize at the Dionysia, the famous Athenian dramatic festival."], "birth": ["Xenophon, Greek mercenary and writer (d. c. 355 BC)"]}, "-430": {"death": ["Empedocles, Greek philosopher (approximate date) (b. c. 490 BC)", "Phidias, Greek sculptor (approximate date) (b. c. 480 BC)", "Zeno of Elea, Greek philosopher (approximate date) (b. c. 490 BC)"], "event": ["The army of Sparta loots Attica for a second time, but Pericles is not daunted and refuses to revise his initial strategy. Unwilling to engage the Spartan army in battle, he again leads a naval expedition to plunder the coasts of the Peloponnesus, this time taking 100 Athenian ships with him.", "Potidaea finally capitulates to the siege by Athenian forces in the winter.", "An outbreak of a plague hits Athens and the disease ravages the densely packed city (modern DNA analyses of material from ancient cemeteries suggest the mortal disease may have been typhus). The plague wipes out over 30,000 citizens, sailors and soldiers as well as Pericles' two sons. Roughly one quarter of the Athenian population dies. The fear of plague is so widespread that the Spartan invasion of Attica is abandoned, their troops being unwilling to risk contact with the diseased enemy.", "Pericles becomes ill from the plague but he recovers, temporarily. He is deposed from his position as General (or Strategos), but is later reappointed.", "Polyclitus completes one of his greatest statues, the Diadumenos (Diadem-bearer)."], "birth": []}, "-429": {"death": ["Pericles, Athenian statesman (epidemic) (b. c. 495 BC)[2]"], "event": ["The Athenians under Xenophon march into Thrace to attack Chalcis. They destroy crops outside Spartolus and begin negotiating with pro-Athenian factions in Chalcis, but the anti-Athenian factions ask for help from Olynthus. An army from Chalcis, Spartolus, and Olynthus meet the Athenians in battle, but their hoplites are defeated. Reinforcements soon arrive from Olynthus, and they launch a second attack on the Athenians. The Athenians are routed, with all of their generals and 430 other men killed.", "The Athenian admiral Phormio has two naval victories, the Naupactus and the Battle of Chalcis at the mouth of the Corinthian Gulf. In the first battle, his 20 ships defeat 47 Corinthian ships commanded by Machaon, Isocrates, and Agatharchidas that were advancing to reinforce the Spartan general, Cnemus' campaign in Acarnania. In the second battle, Phormio routs Cnemus' 77-vessel fleet.", "The Athenians, in alliance with Polychna, destroy the Cretan city of Kydonia.[1]", "The Macedonian king, Perdiccas II, once again betrays the Athenians and sends 1000 troops to support a Spartan assault on Acarnania but they arrive too late to help. In response to this, King Sitalkes of Thrace invades Macedonia with a vast army that includes independent Thracian tribes (such as the Dii) and Paionian tribes (Agrianes and Laeaeans). His progress is slowed when the promised support from Athens fails to materialise. So Perdiccas once again uses diplomacy to ensure the survival of Macedonia. He promises the hand of his sister in marriage to the nephew of Sitalkes, who then persuades Sitalkes to leave Macedonia.", "The plague in Athens that is killing thousands of the city's inhabitants, claims Pericles. Cleon, who has headed the opposition to Pericles' rule, succeeds to power in Athens following Pericles' death."], "birth": ["Ateas, king of Scythia (d. 339 BC)"]}, "-428": {"death": ["Anaxagoras, Greek philosopher (b. c. 500 BC)", "Lars Tolumnius, Etruscan King of Veii (killed in battle)"], "event": ["The chief city of Lesbos, Mytilene, revolts against Athenian rule. The Spartan admiral, Alcidas, leads 40 Peloponnesian alliance ships with the aim of assisting the inhabitants of Mytilene. However, the rebellion by Mytilene is crushed before his forces can arrive.", "Despite encouragement from the Ionian leaders to engage the Athenians, Alcidas declines. Rather, Alcidas leads his fleet to Cyllene where the Spartans resolve to strengthen the fleet and send it to Corcyra where a revolution has broken out. Spartan leaders, Brasidas and Alcidas, then defeat a fleet of Corcyran ships. However, they retire when word reaches them that 60 Athenian ships from Leucas under the command of Eurymedon have been dispatched to intercept them.", "The Greek colony of Cumae in Italy falls to the Samnites, who begin to take control of the Campanian plain.", "Euripides' play Hippolytus is performed in the Dionysia competition, the famous Athenian dramatic festival. The play is awarded first prize.", "Sophocles writes Oedipus the King."], "birth": ["Archytas, Greek philosopher, mathematician, astronomer, statesman, and strategist (d. 347 BC)"]}, "-427": {"death": ["Archidamus II, king of Sparta"], "event": ["Sparta's King Archidamus II is succeeded by his son Agis II.", "Following the surrender of Mytilene to Athens, the Athenian leader Cleon insists that the city be destroyed. In response to the pleadings of a number of Athenian citizens, Cleon's decree to destroy the population of Mytilene is reversed with only the ringleaders of the Mytilenean revolt being executed.", "Plataea surrenders to the Spartans and Thebans after its garrison comes close to death from starvation. Over 200 prisoners are put to death and Plataea is destroyed.", "The civil war in Corcyra, in which the Athenians and the Spartans have interfered ineffectually, results in a victory of the democrats (who support an alliance with Athens) over the oligarchs.", "In an effort to blockade Sparta from access to Sicilian corn, Athens responds to a plea for help from a delegation from the city of Leontini led by Gorgias, the sophist and rhetorician. Leontini is being threatened by Syracuse which is allied to Sparta. However, the Athenian mission led by the Athenian general Laches is unable to offer much help. Laches is later prosecuted by Cleon for his unsuccessful mission to support Athenian interests in Sicily.", "The Quaestorship is opened to the Plebs."], "birth": ["Plato, Greek philosopher (d. c. 347 BC)", "Xenophon, Greek historian, soldier, mercenary and an admirer of Socrates (d. 354 BC)"]}, "-426": {"death": ["Eurylochus, Spartan general (killed in battle)", "Herodotus of Halicarnassos, Dorian Greek historian (b. 484 BC)", "Zhou kao wang, King of the Zhou Dynasty of China"], "event": ["The Athenian leader Cleon and Athenian general Demosthenes revitalise the city's military and naval forces despite opposition from Nicias, a rich merchant and soldier, and his supporters.", "Demosthenes unsuccessfully besieges the Corinthian colony of Leukas. As a result, he does not return to Athens, fearing for his life. However when, later in the year, Ambracia invades Acarnania, and the Acarnanians seek help from Demosthenes, who is patrolling the Ionian Sea coast with twenty Athenian ships, he reaches the Athenian naval base in the Gulf of Corinth at Naupactus and secures it just in time to defend it against a large Spartan army from Delphi under Eurylochus which has come to assist the Ambraciots. Demosthenes defeats the Spartan army and Eurylochus is killed during the Battle of Olpae. The Acarnanians and Ambraciots then sign a peace treaty.", "An Athenian army under Nicias, Hipponicus and Eurymedon defeats a combined Tanagran and Theban army in the Battle of Tanagra."], "birth": []}, "-425": {"death": ["Artaxerxes I, King of Persia", "Herodotus of Halicarnassos, Dorian Greek historian (b. 484 BC)"], "event": ["Artaxerxes I, Achaemenid king of Persia, is succeeded by his son Xerxes II.", "Demosthenes captures and fortifies the port of Pylos in the Peloponnesus, giving Athens a strong base close to Sparta. Meanwhile, a Spartan army, commanded by Brasidas, lands on the nearby island of Sphacteria, but is repulsed by the Athenians. An Athenian fleet summoned by Demosthenes bottles up the Spartan navy in Navarino Bay.", "Cleon joins Demosthenes in the invasion by Athenian troops of Sphacteria. The resulting Battle of Pylos results in an Athenian victory leading to the surrender of many of the Spartan troops. Pylos remains in Athenian hands, and is used as a base for raids into Spartan territory and as a refuge for fleeing Spartan helots.", "Following the failure of peace negotiations between Athens and Sparta, a number of Spartans stranded on the island of Sphacteria after the Battle of Pylos are attacked by an Athenian force under Cleon and Demosthenes. The resulting Battle of Sphacteria leads to a further victory by the Athenians over the Spartans. The Spartans sue for peace, but the Athenian leader Cleon persuades Athens to refuse.", "Zhou wei lie wang becomes King of the Zhou Dynasty of China.", "Callicrates starts to build the Temple of Athena Nike on the Acropolis in Athens (approximate date). Between -410 and 407 BC the temple is surrounded by a parapet.", "What some historians call the Rich style begins in Greece.", "Euripides' play Hecuba is performed.", "Aristophanes' play The Acharnians is performed. Produced by Callistratus, it wins Aristophanes a first prize at the Lenaea."], "birth": []}, "-424": {"death": ["Xerxes II, King of Persia"], "event": ["Xerxes II rules as King of Persia for only about 45 days until he is killed. He is reportedly murdered, while drunk, by Pharnacyas and Menostanes on the orders of Secydianus (or Sogdianus), the son of one of Artaxerxes I's concubines, Alogyne of Babylon.", "At the Congress of Gela, the statesman Hermocrates of Syracuse persuades the cities of Sicily to agree to make peace and urges the exclusion of foreign powers. As a result, the three-year war between his city and Sicily's pro-Athenian towns ends and the Athenian forces, which had been sent to Sicily to support Greek settlements, are forced to withdraw.", "Demosthenes and Hippocrates attempt to capture Megara, but they are defeated by the Spartans under their general Brasidas. Demosthenes then marches to Naupactus to assist in a democratic revolution, and to gather troops for an invasion of Boeotia. However, Demosthenes and Hippocrates are unable to coordinate their attacks and Hippocrates is defeated at the Battle of Delium by Pagondas of Thebes. During the battle, Socrates is said to have saved the life of Alcibiades. Demosthenes attacks Sicyon and is defeated as well.", "After he frustrates the Athenian attack on Megara, Brasidas marches through Boeotia and Thessaly to Chalcidice at the head of 700 helots and 1000 Peloponnesian mercenaries to join the Macedonian king Perdiccas II. Refusing to be made a tool for the furtherance of Perdiccas' ambitions, Brasidas wins over the important cities of Acanthus, Stagirus, Amphipolis and Torone as well as a number of minor towns. An attack on Eion is foiled by the arrival of Thucydides at the head of an Athenian squadron.", "Brasidas' capture of the city of Amphipolis is a major reverse for Athens, for which the Athenian general (and future historian) Thucydides is held responsible and banished. This gives Thucydides the opportunity for undistracted study for his History and for travel and wider contacts, especially on the Peloponnesian side (Sparta and its allies).", "Nicias captures the Peloponnesian island of Cythera, from which to harry the Spartans.", "Sophocles' play Oedipus Rex is performed.", "The temple to Athena Nike (also known as the Wingless Victory) on the Athenian Acropolis is completed. It has been designed by the Athenian architect Callicrates."], "birth": []}, "-423": {"death": ["Sogdianus, King of Persia (assassinated)"], "event": ["Ochus, satrap of Hyrcania and son of Artaxerxes I and a Babylonian concubine, seizes the Persian throne from his half brother Secydianus (or Sogdianus), whom he has executed. The new king rules as Darius II.", "The Athenian general, Laches, successfully moves in the Athenian Assembly for an armistice with Sparta to check the progress of Sparta's most effective general, Brasidas. However, the \"Truce of Laches\" has little impact on Brasidas and collapses within a year.", "Brasidas ignores the proposed year-long truce and proceeds to take Scione and Mende in the hope of reaching Athens and freeing Spartan prisoners. Athens sends reinforcements under Nicias who retakes Mende.", "Aristophanes' play The Clouds is performed as is Sophocles' play Maidens of Trachi and The Putine (The Bottle), by Cratinus."], "birth": []}, "-422": {"death": ["Brasidas, Spartan general", "Cleon, Athenian politician"], "event": ["Athenian leader, Cleon, ends the truce between Athens and Sparta after he resolves to rescue the town of Amphipolis in Macedonia. However, through skillful generalship by Brasidas, the Spartans rout the Athenians in the Battle of Amphipolis. Both Brasidas and Cleon are killed in the battle, thereby removing the key members of the pro-war factions on both sides.", "Alcibiades takes over the leadership of the pro-war party in Athens.", "Aristophanes' play The Wasps is performed."], "birth": []}, "-421": {"death": ["Cratinus, Greek comedy author (approximate date) (b. 520 BC)"], "event": ["Nicias, the leader of the aristocratic and peace party in Athens and Pleistoanax, King of Sparta, negotiate the Peace of Nicias between Athens and Sparta, which brings a temporary end to the Peloponnesian War. The essence of the Peace of Nicias is a return to the prewar situation: most wartime gains are to be returned. Seventeen representatives from each side swear an oath to uphold the treaty, which is meant to last for thirty years or one generation (meaning they are not responsible for the next generation's decision). All of Sparta's allies agree to sign the peace, except for the Boeotians, Corinth, Elis, and Megara.", "Alcibiades engineers an anti-Spartan alliance between Athens and the democracies of Argos, Mantinea and Elis.", "The city of Cumae, the most northerly of the Greek colonies in Italy, falls to the Samnites.", "The construction of the Porch of the Maidens (the Caryatid Porch) commences at the Erechtheion which is part of the Acropolis in Athens.", "Aristophanes' play The Peace is performed."], "birth": []}, "-420": {"death": ["Protagoras, Greek presocratic philosopher (b. c. 490 BC)"], "event": ["The young and popular Alcibiades is elected \"Strategos\" (one of a board of ten generals) and begins to dominate Athenian life and politics. A Quadruple Alliance of Athens, Argos, Mantineia and Elis, which has been organised by Alcibiades (in opposition to Nicias) confronts a Spartan-Boeotian alliance.", "Euripides' play The Suppliant Women is performed."], "birth": []}, "-419": {"death": [], "event": ["Despite the Peace of Nicias still being in effect, Sparta's King Agis II gathers a strong army at Philus and descends upon Argos by marching at night from the north. His allied Boeotian forces fail him, but he is able to conclude a treaty with Argos.", "Euripides' play Andromache is performed.", "Sophocles' play Electra is performed. The play takes its theme from The Libation Bearers by Aeschylus."], "birth": []}, "-418": {"death": ["Laches, Athenian aristocrat and general (b. c. 475 BC)"], "event": ["King Agis II of Sparta escapes having his house razed and being fined 100,000 drachmae for his failure to press his advantage by promising more successful outcomes in the future.", "The Battle of Mantinea is the largest land battle of the Peloponnesian War (with as many as 10,000 troops on each side). Sparta under King Agis II has a major victory over Argos (and its allies Athens, Ellis and Mantinea), which has broken its treaty with Sparta's King Agis II at the insistence of Alcibiades. Agis II's major victory makes amends with the Spartans for his earlier truce with Argos. The commander of the Athenian forces, Laches, is killed in the battle.", "Impressed with the Spartan victory, the inhabitants of Argos change their government from democracy to oligarchy and end their support for Athens in favour of an alliance with Sparta. Many of Argos' allies do the same. Athens becomes increasingly isolated.", "Alcibiades urges the Athenians to conquer Syracuse, subdue Sicily and Carthage and thus gain added forces that will enable them to finish the war against Sparta. His bold offensive plan wins the support of the Athenians."], "birth": ["Epaminondas of Thebes, Theban general and statesman (d. 362 BC)", "Iphicrates, Athenian general (approximate date) (d. c. 353 BC)"]}, "-417": {"death": [], "event": ["Following the loss by Athens and its allies in the Battle of Mantinea, a political \"tug of war\" takes place in Athens. Alcibiades joins forces with Nicias against Hyperbolus, the successor of the demagogue politician Cleon as champion of the common people. Hyperbolus tries to bring about the ostracism of one of Nicias and Alcibiades, but the two men combine their influence to induce the Athenian people to expel Hyperbolus instead."], "birth": []}, "-416": {"death": [], "event": ["With the encouragement of Alcibiades, the Athenians take the island of Melos (which has remained neutral during the Peloponnesian War). Its inhabitants are treated with great cruelty by the Athenians, with all the men capable of bearing arms being killed, while the women and children are made slaves.", "In Sicily, the Ionian city of Segesta asks for Athenian help from the Dorian city of Selinus (which is supported by the powerful Sicilian city of Syracuse). The people of Syracuse are ethnically Dorian (as are the Spartans), while the Athenians, and their allies in Sicily, are Ionian. The Athenians feel obliged to assist their ally and therefore prepare an armada to attack Sicily."], "birth": []}, "-415": {"death": [], "event": ["Athenian orator and politician, Andocides is imprisoned on suspicion of having taken part in the mutilation of the sacred busts called \"Hermae\" shortly before the departure of Athens' military expedition to Sicily. These mutilations cause a general panic, and Andocides is induced to turn informer. Andocides' testimony is accepted, and those whom he implicates, including Alcibiades, are condemned to death. Andocides is sent into exile.", "The Athenian expedition to Sicily sets sail under Nicias, Lamachus and Alcibiades. After his departure with the armada, Alcibiades is accused of profanity and is recalled to Athens to stand trial.", "After learning that he has been condemned to death in absentia, Alcibiades defects to Sparta and Nicias is placed in charge of the Sicilian expedition. The Athenian forces land at Dascon near Syracuse but with little result. Hermocrates heads the Syracusan defence.", "Alcibiades openly joins with the Spartans and persuades them to send Gylippus to assist Syracuse and to fortify Decelea in Attica. He also encourages Ionia to revolt against Athens. As a result, a Spartan fleet soon arrives to reinforce their allies in Syracuse and a stalemate ensues.", "Euripides' play The Trojan Women is performed shortly after the massacre by Athenians of the male population of Melos."], "birth": []}, "-414": {"death": ["Lamachus, Athenian general"], "event": ["Athens responds to appeals from its general, Nicias, by sending out 73 vessels to Sicily under the command of Demosthenes to assist Nicias and his forces with the siege of Syracuse.", "The Athenian army moves to capture Syracuse while the larger fleet of Athenian ships blocks the approach to the city from the sea. After some initial success, the Athenian troops become disorganised in the chaotic night operation and are thoroughly routed by Gylippus, the Spartan commander. The Athenian commander Lamachus is killed. Nicias, although ill, is left in sole charge of the siege of Syracuse.", "Aristophanes' play The Birds is performed."], "birth": []}, "-413": {"death": ["Demosthenes, Athenian general", "Nicias, Athenian soldier and statesman (b. 470 BC)", "Perdiccas II, Macedonian king"], "event": ["After suffering a defeat in which the Athenian commander Lamachus is killed, Demosthenes suggests that they immediately give up the siege of Syracuse and return to Athens, where they are needed to defend against a Spartan invasion of Attica. Nicias refuses, but the Syracusans and Spartans under Hermocrates are able to trap the Athenians in the harbour and the Athenians sustain heavy losses in the Battle of Syracuse. Demosthenes is ambushed by the Syracusans and is forced to surrender. Nicias is soon captured as well, and both are executed, with most of the surviving Athenian soldiers sent to work in the Sicilian quarries.", "Tissaphernes, the Persian satrap of Lydia and Caria, forms an alliance with Sparta. The Spartans, with strategic advice from Alcibiades and limited assistance from the Persians under Pharnabazus, advance almost to the gates of Athens. King Agis II leads the Spartan force that occupies Decelea in Attica.", "Archelaus I becomes King of Macedonia following the death of his father, King Perdiccas II. Archelaus seizes the throne after murdering his uncle, his cousin, and his half brother, the legitimate heir.", "Euripides' play Electra is performed."], "birth": []}, "-412": {"death": [], "event": ["The Persians under Darius II see their opportunity to play off one Greek city-state against another and to recover control of the Greek cities of Asia Minor, which have been under Athenian control since 449 BC. The satraps of Asia Minor, Tissaphernes and Pharnabazus[disambiguation needed\u00a0], are ordered to collect overdue tribute.", "The Spartans sign a treaty of mutual help with the Persian satrap of Lower Asia, Tissaphernes. By the treaty of Miletus, Persia is given complete freedom in western Asia Minor in return for agreeing to pay for seamen to man the Peloponnesian fleet.", "Alcibiades helps stir up revolts amongst Athens' allies in Ionia, on the west coast of Asia Minor. However, Alcibiades loses the confidence of the Spartans and antagonises their king Agis II. As a result, he flees to the court of the Persian satrap Tissaphernes. Alcibiades advises Tissaphernes to withdraw his support from Sparta while conspiring with the oligarchic party in Athens, as Sparta's allied cities break away in a series of revolts.", "The Athenians vote to use their last reserves to build a new fleet.", "Clazomenae revolts against Athens. After a brief resistance, however, it again acknowledges the Athenian supremacy."], "birth": []}, "-411": {"death": ["Antiphon, Athenian politician and orator (b. 480 BC)", "Phrynicus, Athenian general (assassinated)"], "event": ["The democracy of Athens is overthrow by the oligarchic extremists, Antiphon, Theramenes, Peisander and Phrynichus in an effort by the oligarcists to exert more control over the conduct of the war with Sparta and its allies. A \"Council of Four Hundred\" is set up. The total defeat of the Athenian expedition to Sicily and the consequent revolts of many of the subject-allies has weakened Athenian finances severely; the acknowledged purpose of the revolutionary movement is to revise the constitution to better run Athens' finances. However, its rule is high-handed and the Council of Four Hundred is only able to maintain itself for four months.", "When a mutiny breaks out amongst the troops who are fortifying Piraeus (the harbour for Athens), the Council sends Theramenes to quell it. Instead, he puts himself at the head of the mutineers. After Phrynichus, the leader of the extremists, is assassinated, an ensuing meeting of the Athenian Assembly deposes the Council and restores the traditional constitution, but restricts some of the privileges of citizenship to a body called the Five Thousand. The Assembly resumes its old form in being a committee of all citizens.", "The Athenian navy under Thrasybulus recalls Alcibiades from Sardis. Alcibiades' election is confirmed by the Athenians at the request of Theramenes. A Spartan fleet in the Hellespont at Cynossema is then defeated by an Athenian fleet commanded by Thrasybulus and Alcibiades.", "Antiphon defends himself in a speech Thucydides describes as the greatest ever made by a man on trial for his life. Nevertheless, Antiphon is unable to persuade his accusers and he is executed for treason.", "Euripides' play Iphigeneia in Tauris is performed.", "Aristophanes' plays Lysistrata and Women Celebrating the Thesmophoria are performed."], "birth": ["Timoleon, Greek statesman and general (approximate date) (d. 337 BC)"]}, "-410": {"death": [], "event": ["Commanding 20 ships, the Athenian generals Theramenes and Thrasybulus collaborate with Alcibiades and the main Athenian fleet in inflicting a major defeat on the Spartan navy commanded by Mindarus and its supporting Persian land army near Cyzicus on the shore of the Propontis (Sea of Marmara). As a result of its victory in the Battle of Cyzicus, Athens regains control over the vital grain route from the Black Sea.", "Alcibiades installs a garrison at Chrysopolis under Theramenes to exact a tithe from all shipping that comes from the Black Sea. This revenue enables the Athenians to put an end to the regime of the Five Thousand and restore their traditional institutions in full. Democracy is restored in Athens. The new demagogue Cleophon dismisses peace overtures made by Sparta.", "An Oligarchic revolt in Corcyra is unsuccessful.", "Carthage's Iberian colonies revolt and secede cutting off Carthage's major supply of silver and copper. Hannibal Mago, the grandson of the Carthaginian general Hamilcar (who unsuccessfully invaded Sicily in 480 BC), begins preparations to reclaim Sicily.", "Evagoras re-establishes his family's claim as kings of Salamis which has been under Phoenician control for a number of years.", "A relief decoration from the parapet (now destroyed), Nike (Victory) adjusting her sandal is constructed in the Temple of Athena Nike on the Acropolis in Athens and is ready in 407 BC. It is now preserved at the Acropolis Museum in Athens.", "The grave stele of Hegeso is made and is finished about -ten years later (approximate date). It is now preserved at the National Archaeological Museum in Athens."], "birth": []}, "-409": {"death": ["Pleistoanax, king of Sparta since 458 BC"], "event": ["Alcibiades recaptures Byzantium, ending the city's rebellion from Athens. This action completes Athenian control of the Bosporus which secures the Athenian supply route for grain from the Bosporan Kingdom in the Black Sea region.", "The Athenian general, Thrasyllus, sails out from Athens with a sizable force to campaign in Ionia. There, he quickly captures Colophon and raids the Ionian countryside, but is defeated outside Ephesus by a combined Ephesian, Persian, and Syracusan force.", "Pausanias succeeds his father Pleistoanax as Agiad king of Sparta.", "The city of Rhodes is founded.", "Taking advantage of the quarrels between the Greek cities in Sicily and of the mutual exhaustion of Athens and Syracuse, Carthage seeks to reimpose its influence over the island. Hannibal Mago, grandson of Hamilcar, invades Sicily with a strong force. He defeats the Sicilian Greeks and avenges his grandfather through the torture and killing of 3,000 Greek prisoners. He captures the cities of Selinus (modern Selinunte) and Himera, before returning triumphantly to Carthage with the spoils of war.", "Sophocles' play Philoctetes is performed, with the theme of the Trojan War."], "birth": []}, "-408": {"death": [], "event": ["King Darius II of Persia decides to continue the war against Athens and give support to the Spartans. His wife, Parysatis, persuades him to appoint his younger son, Cyrus, as satrap (governor) of Lydia, Phrygia, and Cappadocia and commander in chief of the Achaemenian forces in Asia Minor in place of Tissaphernes.", "Tissaphernes' influence is limited to the satrapy of Caria. Darius II also gives Cyrus funds to re-create the Spartan fleet and sends him to Sardis with instructions to increase Persian support for Sparta. Cyrus begins to collect an army of mercenaries (including Greeks) for his own ends.", "Alcibiades enters Athens in triumph after an absence of 7 years. He leads the religious procession from Athens to Eleusis, thus atoning for his alleged impiety in 415 BC when he was held to have joined in profaning the Sacred Mysteries. Alcibiades is appointed commander-in-chief with autocratic powers and leaves for Samos to rejoin his fleet.", "The Spartan admiral Lysander arrives at Ephesus in autumn and builds up a great fleet with help from the new Persian satrap, Cyrus.", "At the Panhellenic gathering at Olympia, the philosopher Gorgias speaks out against the Spartan alliance with Persia.", "The city of Himera is destroyed by the Carthaginians.", "Euripides' plays Orestes and The Phoenician Women are performed. Euripides then leaves Athens in dissatisfaction and travels to the court of Archelaus I of Macedon at the King's invitation."], "birth": ["Eudoxus of Cnidus, Greek astronomer, mathematician, physician, scholar and adherent of Pythagoras (d. c. 355 BC)", "Dion, tyrant of Syracuse (d. c. 354 BC)"]}, "-407": {"death": ["Hermocrates, leader of the moderate democrats of Syracuse"], "event": ["The Athenian general Thrasybulus recaptures Abdera and Thasos.", "The Spartan admiral Lysander refuses to be lured out of Ephesus to do battle with Alcibiades. However, while Alcibiades is away seeking supplies, the Athenian squadron is placed under the command of Antiochus, his helmsman, who is routed by the Spartan fleet (with the help of the Persians under Cyrus) in the Battle of Notium (or Ephesus).", "The defeat gives the enemies of Alcibiades an excuse to strip him of his command. He never returns again to Athens. He sails north to land he owned in the Thracian Chersonese. Except for a brief appearance at Aegospotami, Alcibiades' involvement in the Peloponnesian War is over.", "The exiled former leader of the moderate democrats of Syracuse, Hermocrates, is killed while attempting to force his way back into Syracuse."], "birth": ["Speusippus, Greek philosopher (d. 339 BC)"]}, "-406": {"death": ["Euripides, Athenian playwright (b. c. 480 BC)", "Hannibal Mago, Carthaginian general", "Sophocles, Athenian dramatist and politician (b. c. 495 BC)"], "event": ["Callicratidas is appointed as the navarch of the Spartan fleet, replacing Lysander. Callicratidas assembles a fleet and sails to Methymna, on Lesbos, to which he lays siege. This move threatens the Athenian grain supply.", "Alcibiades is replaced by a board of generals. Athens sends a member of the board, Admiral Conon, to relieve the siege of Mytilene. To defend Lesbos, Conon is forced to move his numerically inferior fleet from Samos to the Hekatonnesi islands near Methymna. When Callicratidas attacks him, Conon is forced back to Mytilene, where he is blockaded by Callicratidas' Spartan fleet.", "Athens wins the Battle of Arginusae, near Lesbos, and the blockade of Conon is broken. To relieve Conon, the Athenians assemble a new fleet composed largely of newly constructed ships manned by inexperienced crews. This inexperienced fleet is inferior to the Spartans, but its commanders employ new and unorthodox tactics, which allow the Athenians to secure a dramatic and unexpected victory. The Spartan force is soundly defeated, and Callicratidas is killed.", "Returning to Athens after the battle, Theramenes leads Athenian agitation against the eight generals who have commanded in the engagement; the six who have returned to Athens are condemned for negligence in not having picked up survivors from the ships disabled in the battle. The Athenian generals (including Pericles' son) are put to death.", "Sparta sues for peace, which the Athenian leader Cleophon rejects. Sparta yields to demands by the Persian satrap Cyrus that Lysander command a fleet in the Hellespont.", "The Roman forces begin a decade-long siege against Veii.", "The Carthaginians again invade Sicily and attack Agrigentum (Acragas). Plague breaks out in their camp and Hannibal Mago dies. Himilco assumes command and captures Agrigentum (Acragas), Gela and Camarina. Gela is destroyed and its treasures sacked. The survivors take refuge in Syracuse. The plague is carried back to Carthage by its soldiers."], "birth": []}, "-405": {"death": ["Philolaus, Greek mathematician and philosopher (approximate date) (b. c. 480 BC)"], "event": ["After their victory in the Battle of Arginusae over the Spartans, the Athenian fleet follows the reappointed Spartan admiral, Lysander, to the Hellespont. The Athenian fleet under Admiral Conon is destroyed by the Spartans under Lysander in the Battle of Aegospotami in the Sea of Marmara and Conon flees to Cyprus.", "The Spartan king Pausanias lays siege to Athens while Lysander's fleet blockades Piraeus. This action closes the grain route through the Hellespont, thereby starving Athens.", "While the Peloponnesians besiege Athens, Theramenes tries to negotiate with Lysander. He is away for three months while Athens is being reduced to starvation. Then he heads the embassy that negotiates the terms of capitulation to the Spartans.", "Dionysius the Elder rises to power as the tyrant of Syracuse. He makes peace with the Carthaginian general, Hamilco (whose army has been weakened by the plague), and fortifies Syracuse. This treaty leaves Carthage in control of most of Sicily.", "Dionysius the Elder ruthlessly consolidates and expands his power. He builds a wall around Syracuse and fortifies Epipolae. The Greek citizens of Naxos, Catana, and Leontini are removed from their cities; many of them are enslaved and their homes are given to Sicilian and Italian mercenaries. Dionysius prepares his army to fight against Carthage, which now occupies western and southern Sicily.", "Aristophanes' play The Frogs is performed.", "Euripides' The Bacchae and Iphigeneia at Aulis are performed posthumously as part of a tetralogy at the City Dionysia festival and win first prize.", "The Erechtheum, which includes The Porch of Maidens (Caryatid Porch), is completed in the Ionian style on the Acropolis in Athens after 16 years of construction."], "birth": []}, "-404": {"death": ["Theramenes, Athenian statesman", "Alcibiades, Athenian statesman (b. c. 450 BC)", "Cleophon, Athenian politician and demagogue", "Darius II Ochus, King of the Persian Empire"], "event": ["The Athenian leader Cleophon continues to urge resistance against the Peloponnesians, but the situation becomes desperate and he is arrested, condemned to death and executed.", "April 25 \u2013 Athens, full of refugees and weakened by plague and hunger, capitulates and the Peloponnesian War ends.", "Theramenes secures terms that save the city of Athens from destruction. The Spartans allow Athens to retain its independence. However, Athens loses all its foreign possessions and what is left of its fleet and is required to become an ally of Sparta. The Long Walls around Athens are pulled down. Greek towns across the Aegean Sea in Ionia are again the subjects of the Persian Empire.", "The Spartan general, Lysander, puts in place a puppet government in Athens with the establishment of the oligarchy of the \"Thirty Tyrants\" under Critias and including Theramenes as a leading member. This government executes a number of citizens and deprives all but a few of their rights.", "Many of Athens' former allies are now ruled by boards of ten (decarchy), often reinforced with garrisons under a Spartan commander (Harmost).", "The Athenian general Thrasybulus is exiled by the Thirty (the oligarchy of Athens), and he retires to Thebes.", "A split develops between Theramenes and Critias who has Theramenes killed (by drinking poison) on charges of treason.", "Emerging after the Spartan victory at Aegospotami, the former Athenian leader, Alcibiades, takes refuge in Phrygia in northwestern Asia Minor with the Persian satrap, Pharnabazus, and seeks their assistance for the Athenians. The Spartans discover his plans and arrange with Pharnabazus to have him assassinated.", "Lysander sails to Samos and conquers it for Sparta.", "Amyrtaeus of Sais successfully leads a revolt against the Persian Empire's control of the Egyptian delta. He becomes the first (and only) pharaoh of the Twenty-eighth Dynasty.", "The Persian King Darius II dies of an illness in Babylon. He is succeeded by his son Artaxerxes II (Memnon\u2014'the Mindful').", "Darius II's younger son, Cyrus, is accused by Tissaphernes, the satrap of Caria, of plotting his brother Artaxerxes II's murder. On the intercession of Artaxerxes II and Darius's mother, Parysatis, however, Cyrus is pardoned and sent back to his satrapy."], "birth": []}, "-403": {"death": ["Critias, leading member of the Athenian Thirty Tyrants oligarchy (b. 460 BC)"], "event": ["Thrasybulus leads the democratic resistance to the new oligarchic government, known as the Thirty Tyrants, that the victorious Spartans have imposed on Athens. He commands a small force of exiles that invades Attica and, in successive battles, defeats first a Spartan garrison and then the forces of the oligarchic government (which includes the Spartan general, Lysander) in the Battle of Munychia. The leader of the Thirty Tyrants, Critias, is killed in the battle.", "The Battle of Piraeus is fought between Athenian exiles, who have defeated the government of the Thirty Tyrants and occupied Piraeus, and a Spartan force sent to combat them. In the battle, the Spartans narrowly defeat the exiles, with both sides suffering large numbers of casualties. After the battle, the Agiad King of Sparta, Pausanias arranges a settlement between the two parties which allows the reunification of Athens and Piraeus, and the re-establishment of democratic government in Athens. The remaining oligarchic Thirty Tyrants are allowed to flee to Eleusis.", "Thrasybulus restores democratic institutions to Athens and grants amnesties to all except the oligarchic extremists. He is helped by Lysias, the Athenian orator, in arguing the case against the oligarchy.", "Andocides, Athenian orator and politician, who has been implicated in the mutilation of the Herms on the eve of the departure of the Athenian expedition against Sicily in 415 BC, returns from exile under the general amnesty.", "The state of Jin in China is partitioned among three elite landholding families. This is the beginning of the Warring States Period.", "Marquis Wen of Wei ascends to power in the State of Wei. He sponsors Confucianism and employs able political advisors such as Li Kui, Wu Qi, and Ximen Bao.", "Under archon Eucleides, the Athenians accept a spelling reform, adopting the Ionian alphabet, which includes eta and omega. The new alphabet came to be known as the Euclidean alphabet."], "birth": []}, "-402": {"death": ["Zhou wei lie wang, King of the Zhou Dynasty of China"], "event": ["Archelaus I, King of Macedonia, helps establish a pro-Macedonian oligarchy in Larissa in Thessaly."], "birth": ["Phocion, Athenian statesman and general (d. c. 318 BC)"]}, "-401": {"death": ["Agis II, Eurypontid king of Sparta", "Clearchus, Spartan general and mercenary", "Cyrus the Younger, younger son of Darius II, King of Persia"], "event": ["Cyrus the Younger uses a quarrel with Tissaphernes over the Ionian cities as a pretext for gathering a large army and also pretends to prepare an expedition to Pisidia, in the Taurus Mountains. Cyrus starts out with about 20,000 men, of whom around 10,000 are Greek mercenaries. When he reaches the Euphrates River at Thapsacus, he announces that he is marching against Artaxerxes II. He advances unopposed into Babylonia; but Artaxerxes, warned at the last moment by Tissaphernes, hastily gathers an army. The two forces meet in the Battle of Cunaxa, north of Babylon, where Cyrus is slain.", "The Greek mercenaries fighting for Cyrus are left stranded after Cyrus' defeat. They fight their way north through hostile Persians, Armenians, and Kurds to Trapezus on the coast of the Black Sea under Xenophon, who becomes their leader when the Persian satrap, Tissaphernes has Clearchus of Sparta and the other senior Greek captains captured and executed by Artaxerxes.", "Agesilaus II becomes king of Sparta on the death of his stepbrother Agis II.", "Zhou an wang becomes King of the Zhou Dynasty of China.", "Sophocles' tragic play Oedipus at Colonus is performed posthumously. It is produced by his grandson (also called Sophocles) at the Festival of Dionysus in Athens."], "birth": []}, "-400": {"death": ["Thucydides, Greek historian (approximate date) (b. c. 460 BC)", "Aspasia of Miletus, widow of Pericles of Athens (approximate date) (b. c. 470 BC)"], "event": ["Artaxerxes II King of Persia appoints Tissaphernes to take over all the districts in Asia Minor over which Artaxerxes II's brother Cyrus had been governor before his revolt.", "Xenophon's \"Ten Thousand\" make their way back to Greece, with most of the men enlisting with the Spartans. Xenophon's successful march through the Persian Empire encourages Sparta to turn on the Persians and begin wars against the Persians in Asia Minor.", "With the outbreak of the war between Sparta and the Persians, the Athenian admiral, Conon, obtains joint command, with Pharnabazus, of a Persian fleet.", "War breaks out between Sparta and Elis.", "The Carthaginians occupy Malta.", "London has its origins on a rise above marshy waters at the point where the Walbrook joins the River Thames. The Celtic king, Belin, rebuilds an earth wall surrounding a few dozen huts and orders a small landing place to be cut into the south side of the wall, along the river front, where a wooden quay is built (approximate date).", "Amyrtaeus of Sais successfully completes a revolt against Persian control by gaining control of all of Upper Egypt.", "The Olmec culture in Mesoamerica comes to an end as its city of La Venta is abandoned (around this year).", "San Lorenzo Tenochtitl\u00e1n is abandoned (around this year).", "The catapult is invented by Greek engineers.", "The Mature classical period of sculpture ends in Ancient Greece and is succeeded by the fourth-century (Late Classical) period (approximate date).", "A model of the Acropolis of Athens is made. It is now kept at the Royal Ontario Museum in Toronto, Canada (approximate date).", "Theodorus[disambiguation needed\u00a0] from Phokaia in Asia Minor, builds the Tholos, the sanctuary of Athena Pronaia in Delphi (approximate date).", "Brahmanism starts evolving in Hinduism, a process which takes place over the following 200 years (approximate date)."], "birth": []}}