{"401": {"death": ["December 19 \u2013 Pope Anastasius I", "Duan Ye, prince of the Chinese state Northern Liang", "L\u00fc Zuan, emperor of the Di state Later Liang", "Murong Sheng, emperor of the Xianbei state Later Yan (b. 373)", "Empress Yang, wife of L\u00fc Zuan"], "event": ["Emperor Arcadius sends many gifts to the Hunnish chieftain Uldin in appreciation of his victory over the Goths and Gainas. Arcadius then allies himself with the Huns.", "Piracy by slavetraders from Galatia (Turkey), along the coasts of Africa. The old Legio II Adiutrix, part of which had always been stationed at Aquincum (modern Budapest), is divided into two comitatenses and shipped to Britannia.", "Stilicho, Roman general (magister militum), leads his army in an extensive campaign against the Vandals in Rhaetia (Switzerland).", "November 18 \u2013 The Visigoths, led by king Alaric I, cross the Alps and invade northern Italy. Emperor Honorius moves his capital to the coastal city of Ravenna, which is protected by marshes and strong fortifications.", "The Chronicon Pachale (Paschal Chronicle) reports that the Black Sea is completely frozen.", "Kumarajiva, Kuchean Buddhist monk, arrives in Chang'an and begins translating Buddhist texts into Chinese.", "December 19 \u2013 Pope Anastasius I dies at Rome after a 2-year reign, and is succeeded by Innocent I as the 40th pope proclaiming his universal power over the whole of Christendom.", "The Mahabharata, a Indian Sanskrit epic, is finalised."], "birth": ["Aelia Eudocia, Roman Empress and wife of Theodosius II (approximate date)", "Leo I, Byzantine Emperor (d. 474)", "April 10 \u2013 Theodosius II, Roman Emperor (d. 450)"]}, "402": {"death": ["Empress Dowager Ding, mother of Murong Sheng", "Quintus Aurelius Symmachus, Roman consul and intellectual", "Sima Yuanxian, regent during the Jin Dynasty (b. 382)", "Tufa Lilugu, prince of the Xianbei state Southern Liang"], "event": ["The Visigoths advance on Mediolanum (modern Milan) and laid siege to Asti in Liguria. King Alaric I send enovoys to negotiate a peace, but the Roman government refuses to make deals with \"barbarians\".", "April 6 \u2013 Battle of Pollentia: Stilicho recalls troops from Britain and the Rhine frontier to defend Italy. He decides to attack the Goths on Eastern Sunday and manages to capture Alaric's wife and childern.", "Emperors Arcadius and his younger brother Honorius become Roman consuls.", "King Gwanggaeto the Great of Goguryeo (Korea) defeats the forces of Later Yan, seizing some of their border fortresses.", "The Avars, led by Shelun (Ch\u00f6-louen), having defeated the Gaoju Dingling (Kao-kiu Ting-ling) near Kobbo, establish a nomadic empire that ranges from Mongolia to the Irtysh.", "Fa-Hien, Chinese Buddhist monk, makes a pilgrimage to India initiating Sino-Indian relations. Stirred by his faith to Buddhism, he visit the sites of Siddhartha Gautama's life.", "Jerome writes \"Apologiae contra Rufinum\" and \"Liber tertius seu ultima responsio adversus scripta Rufini\".", "The Pure Land school of Buddhism founds a monastery upon the top of Mount Lushan.", "Porphyry of Gaza orders the destruction of pagan temples in Gaza."], "birth": []}, "403": {"death": ["Epiphanius of Salamis, Church Father", "Severin, bishop of Cologne", "Sima Daozi, regent of the Eastern Jin Dynasty (b. 364)"], "event": ["June \u2013 Battle of Verona: The Visigoths under command of king Alaric I invade Italy again and advance through the Brenner Pass. Stilicho with a army of 30,000 men, defeats the Goths north of Verona. Alaric makes a truce and withdraws eastward to Illyricum.", "Emperor Honorius and Stilicho are honored with a triumphal march for the victories against the Goths and Vandals. This becomes the last victory celebrated in Rome.", "Theodosius II, age 2, becomes consul of the Eastern Roman Empire.", "Hui Yuan argues that Buddhist monks should be exempt from bowing to the emperor.", "Asin of Baekje allies with Silla against Gwanggaeto the Great of Goguryeo (Korea).", "The Synod of the Oak deposes and banishes John Chrysostom, bishop of Constantinople, but shortly afterward he is recalled only to be banished again."], "birth": ["Hilary, bishop of Arles (d. 449)", "Yuan He, official of the Northern Wei Dynasty (d. 479)"]}, "404": {"death": ["October 6 \u2013 Aelia Eudoxia, Roman Empress and wife of Arcadius", "Claudian, Roman poet (approximate date)", "Flavian I, Patriarch of Antioch", "He Fani, empress of the Jin Dynasty (b. 339)", "Huan Xuan, warlord and emperor of the Jin Dynasty (b. 369)", "Paula, Desert Mother and saint (b. 347)", "January 1 \u2013 Telemachus, Christian monk and martyr"], "event": ["1 January Last gladiator competetion in Rome|", "January 1 \u2013 An infuriated Roman mob tears Telemachus, a Christian monk, to pieces for trying to stop a gladiators' fight in the public arena held in Rome.", "The dome in Ravenna is built by the entire population of the city.", "October 6 \u2013 Empress Eudoxia has her seventh and last pregnancy who ends in a miscarriage. She is left bleeding and dies of an infection short after.", "Gwanggaeto the Great of Goguryeo (Korea) attacks Liaodong and takes the entire Liaodong Peninsula.", "The Chinese Buddhist monk Huiyuan, who founded the Pure Land Buddhism sect and the monastery on Mount Lushan, writes the book On Why Monks Do Not Bow Down Before Kings in this year. In his book he argues that although the Buddhist clergy should remain independent and undisturbed by politics, the Buddhist laymen nonetheless make good subjects under monarchs, due to their fear of retribution of karma and desire to be reborn in paradise.", "Eudoxia exiles John Chrysostom, bishop of Constantinople, for criticizing her sumptuous lifestyle. He is banished to the Caucasus in Armenia. Pope Innocent I at Rome orders a synod to reinstate the bishop, but his envoys are imprisoned. Atticus becomes the new bishop of Constantinople."], "birth": []}, "405": {"death": ["November 11 \u2013 Arsacius of Tarsus, archbishop of Constantinople", "Moses the Black, Christian monk and priest (b. 330)", "Murong De, emperor of the Xianbei state Southern Yan (b. 336)", "Richu, emperor of Japan (approximate date)", "June 26 \u2013 Saint Vigilius, bishop of Trent (b. 353)", "Theon of Alexandria, last director of the Library of Alexandria (approximate date)"], "event": ["Emperor Honorius closes the Flavian Amphitheatre (Colosseum) in an austerity move that abolishes amusements.", "Stilicho, Roman general (magister militum), orders the Sibylline Books to be burned, according to the Roman poet Rutilius Claudius Namatianus.", "Stilicho crushes a coalition of Asding Vandals, Ostrogoths, and Quadi with an army raised from forces of the Rhine frontier, leaving this sector dangerously weakened.", "King Radagaisus leads a invasion with a force of 20,000 men and crosses the Alps. He spends the winter in the Po Valley and is observed by Stilicho, who lacks sufficient strength to prepare a offensive against the invading German tribes. The exact numbers of the migration are unknown, probably nearly 100,000, including Alans, Burgundians, Goths, Vandals, and other smaller tribes.", "Flavius Aetius is sent as a child hostage at the court of Alaric I, king of the Visigoths.", "The Khitan are first mentioned in Chinese chronicles. They wander along the boundaries of Kara-muren, and form part of the Donghu (Tong-hou) confederation.", "The Armenian alphabet is invented by Mesrob Mashdots.", "The Japanese court officially adopts the Chinese writing system (approximate date).", "Theon of Alexandria, Greek mathematician, dies at age 70 (approximate), having been helped in his work by his daughter Hypatia.", "Saint Jerome, Christian priest, publishes the Vulgate Bible.", "In Africa, Augustine of Hippo admits that Donatism is a heresy."], "birth": ["Ricimer, de facto ruler of the Western Roman Empire (approximate date)", "Salvian, Christian writer (approximate date)", "Yuan Qigui, empress and wife of Wen of Liu Song (d. 440)"]}, "406": {"death": ["Alban of Mainz, priest and martyr (approximate date)", "Godigisel, king of the Vandals", "Gu Kaizhi, Chinese painter (b. c. 344)", "August 23 \u2013 Radagaisus, Gothic king", "Zhang Tianxi, ruler of Former Liang (b. 346)"], "event": ["Siege of Florence: Stilicho defeats with help from Hunnic forces under Uldin, as well Alan and Gothic cavalry an army of 20,000 warriors led by Radagaisus. He sends a heavily guarded convoy of provisions into the town and laid siege, by constructing a line of blockhouses, connected by trenches. After two months Stilicho relieves the siege and liberates the city.", "Radagaisus is forced to retreat into the hills of Fiesole. There he tries to escape, but is captured by the Romans.", "August 23 \u2013 Radagaisus is executed, 12,000 \"barbarians\" are incorporated into the Roman army or sold as slaves.", "Autumn \u2013 The remaining Roman legions in Britain decided to mutiny. The usurper Marcus is proclaimed emperor.", "The Vandals led by Godigisel are intercepted and defeated by the Franks under Marcomir. Godigisel is killed in battle and succeeded by his son Gunderic.", "December 31 \u2013 Vandals, Alans and Suebians cross the Rhine at Mogontiacum (modern Mainz), beginning an invasion of Gaul (traditional date, this may have occurred in 405).", "Fa-Hien, Chinese traveler, arrives in India. He visit the major seats of Buddhist learning (Udyana, Peshawar, and Taxila).", "Hanzei succeeds his brother Richu, and becomes the 18th emperor of Japan.", "Cultivation of rye, oats, hops, and spelt (a wheat used for livestock feed) is introduced into Europe by the invading Vandals, Alans, and Scirii, who also introduce a heavy wheeled plow to be used for farming.", "Stained glass is used for the first time in churches in Rome."], "birth": ["Attila the Hun, ruler of the Hunnic Empire (approximate date)", "Shao of Liu Song, emperor of the Liu Song Dynasty (d. 424)"]}, "407": {"death": ["Fu Xunying, empress of the Xianbei state Later Yan", "John Chrysostom, archbishop of Constantinople", "Maria, empress consort and wife of Honorius", "Murong Xi, emperor of the Xianbei state Later Yan (b. 385)", "Victricius, missionary and bishop of Rouen (approximate date)"], "event": ["Gratian, Roman usurper, is installed as emperor after the death of Marcus. According to Orosius, he is a native Briton of urban aristocracy.", "Gratian is assassinated and Constantine III, a general (magister militum), declares himself Roman emperor. To extend his dominion over Gaul and Spain, he takes practically all the Roman garrisons from Britain and crosses the English Channel. Constantine occupies Arles and established tenuous authority over Gaul, sharing control with marauding \"barbarians\". This is generally seen as the beginning of Rome's withdrawal from Britain.", "End of Roman rule in Britain: After 360 years of occupation the local regional British-Roman leaders, raise their own levies for defence against Saxon sea rovers. They cultivate oysters, having learned the technique from the Romans.", "Gaul is invaded by Germanic Vandals and Suevi, and Alans.", "Liu Bobo (Xia Wuliedi) founds the state of Xia and claims the title \"Heavenly Prince\" (Tian Wang)."], "birth": ["Wen of Liu Song, emperor of the Liu Song Dynasty (d. 453)"]}, "408": {"death": ["May 1 \u2013 Arcadius, Roman Emperor", "August 22 \u2013 Flavius Stilicho, Roman general", "May 4 \u2013 Venerius, bishop of Milan and saint"], "event": ["May 1 \u2013 Emperor Arcadius dies in his palace at Constantinople after a weak 13-year reign. He is succeeded by his 7-year-old son, Theodosius II, who rules under the domination of his devout Christian sister Pulcheria and Anthemius, who acts as regent.", "Summer \u2013 Emperor Honorius marries Thermantia, second daughter of Stilicho, his famous general (magister militum).", "The Roman usurper Constantine III established his headquarters at Arles (Southern Gaul) and elevates his eldest son, Constans, to the rank of Caesar. He sends him with a expeditionary force under Gerontius to Hispania, in order to suppress the revolt of some members of the House of Theodosius who are loyal to Honorius.", "August 22 \u2013 Stilicho is accused of treason against Honorius and is decapitated at Ravenna. His Hun bodyguard is killed, mass murders of Vandal soldiers followed.[1].", "The Hexamilion wall is constructed. Fortifications are built across the Isthmus of Corinth guarding the only land route into the Peloponnese peninsula from Greece.", "September \u2013 Alaric I, king of the Visigoths, crosses the Julian Alps with an army of 30,000 men and marches into the Roman heartland. He lays siege to Rome and Gothic auxiliaries desert to join Alaric's forces. After much bargaining, the Senate agrees to pay him a ransom of 5,000 pounds of gold, 30,000 pounds of silver, 4,000 silken tunics, and 3,000 hides dyed scarlet.", "The Huns under Uldin cross the lower Danube and attack the Eastern Roman Empire, setting fire to frontier forts and taking control of the Castra Martis (modern Bulgaria). The Romans negotiate for peace, but Uldin demands an exorbitant gold tribute in return for his withdrawal. This demand is rejected and Anthemius forced the Huns back across the Danube.", "Attila, age 12, is sent as child hostage to the court at Rome and in return, the Romans sent Flavius Aetius to the Huns.", "King Yazdegerd I of Persia maintains cordial relations with the Roman Empire. He becomes an executor of Arcadius' will and is entrusted with the care of the young Theodosius II until he comes of age.", "Alaric I exacts a tribute from Rome that includes 3,000 pounds of pepper. The spice is valued for alleged medicinal virtues and for disguising spoilage in meat that is past its prime."], "birth": ["Taiwu, emperor of the Northern Wei Dynasty (d. 452)"]}, "409": {"death": ["Gao Yun, emperor of Northern Yan", "Li, empress and wife of Gao Yun", "Mallius Theodorus, Roman consul (approximate date)", "Serena, noblewoman and wife of Stilicho", "Wei Daowudi, emperor of Northern Wei (b. 371)"], "event": ["Spring \u2013 Gerontius, Roman general (magister militum), who had been a partisan of Constantine III revolts in Hispania. He elevates Maximus, his domesticus, as emperor.", "October 13 \u2013 The Vandals, led by king Gunderic, cross the Pyrenees into the Iberian Peninsula. They receive land from the Romans, as foederati, in Baetica (Southern Spain). The Alans occupy lands in Lusitania and the Suebi controlled parts of Gallaecia (modern Portugal).", "The Visigothic king Alaric I lays siege to Rome a second time, bringing the inhabitants close to starvation. Emperor Honorius, safe in inaccessible Ravenna, refuses to negotiate for peace, despite repeated offers from Alaric. He comes to terms with the Senate and sets up a rival emperor, Priscus Attalus, prefect (praefectus urbi) of the city.", "Honorius agrees that sons of prominent families at court in Ravenna be send beyond the Danube as hostages; in return, later he calls up ten thousand Hun mercenaries.[1]", "Famine strikes Hispania, Gaul and the Italian Peninsula.", "Ming Yuan Di, age 17, succeeds Wei Daowudi as ruler of the Chinese Northern Wei (see Northern dynasties)."], "birth": ["Daniel the Stylite, Christian saint (approximate date)", "Liu Yikang, prince of the Liu Song Dynasty (d. 451)"]}, "410": {"death": ["Alaric I, king of the Visigoths", "Hanzei, emperor of Japan (approximate date)", "Maron, Syriac Christian monk", "Murong Chao, emperor of Southern Yan (b. 385)", "Yujiul\u00fc Shelun, khagan (emperor) of Xianbei"], "event": ["Spring \u2013 Constantine III crosses the Alps into Liguria (Northern Italy), but retreats to Gaul after Gerontius revolts in Spain against his son Constans II.", "Emperor Honorius sends his Rescript (diplomatic letters) to the Romano-British magistrates, where he explains that the cities in Britain must provide for their own defence against the Angles, Jutes, and Saxons. This effectively ending Roman rule in Great Britain.", "Flavius Constantius, Roman general and politician, is promoted to the rank of magister militum. He becomes the imperial adviser of Honorius, and the power behind the throne in the Western Roman Empire.", "The Eastern Roman Empire send six legions (6,000 men) to aid Honorius at Ravenna. He negotiates with king Alaric I, who ceremonially deposes Priscus Attalus as co-emperor.", "August 24 \u2013 The Visigoths under Alaric I sack Rome after a third siege. Slaves open the Salarian Gate and Goths loot the city for three days. It is the first time since 390 BC that Rome has fallen to an enemy. This marks the decline of the Roman Empire.", "Galla Placidia, daughter of Theodosius I, is captured by the Visigoths and becomes an hostage during their move from the Italian Peninsula to Gaul.", "Alaric I marches southwards into Calabria and makes plans to invade Africa. But a storm destroyed his Gothic fleet and many of his soldiers drowned. Alaric dies in Cosenza, probably of fever, and his body is buried along with his treasure under the riverbed of the Busento. He is succeeded by his brother-in-law Ataulf, who become king of the Visigoths.", "The city of Al\u00e9ria on the island of Corsica is devastated by a huge fire, destroying its port and most of its inhabitants.", "Prithivisena becomes king of the Vakataka in the Deccan (India).", "Council of Seleucia: Persian Christians create a national church and adopt the Nicene Creed.", "Honoratus founded on the \u00eele Saint-Honorat (France) the Monastery of L\u00e9rins and formed a monastic community."], "birth": ["Severinus of Noricum, monk and saint (approximate date)"]}, "411": {"death": ["September 18 \u2013 Constantine III, Roman usurper", "Constans II, usurper and son of Constantine III", "Gerontius, Roman general", "Gundomar I, king of Burgundy", "Yax Nuun Ayiin I, king of Tikal (Guatemala) (approximate date)"], "event": ["Emperor Honorius sends two Roman generals to deal with the usurper Constantine III in Gaul. They kill Gerontius, Constantine's rebellious general (magister militum) in Spain, then besiege Arles and defeat Constantine. He is taken prisoner and put to death at Ravenna.", "Following the defeat of the Constantine III, the Burgundians and the Gallic nobility proclaim Jovinus, Gallo-Roman senator, emperor of the Western Roman Empire at Mogontiacum (modern Mainz).", "King Ataulf leads the Goths into Gaul at the instigation of Honorius who promises to recognise a Visigothic Kingdom if he defeats the several usurpers who threaten the Roman Empire.", "The Alans establish their rule in the Roman province of Lusitania (Portugal south of the Duero River and Spain).", "The Teutonic tribes in Spain join the Roman Empire as foederati (allies with military commitments).", "Ingyo succeeds his brother Hanzei, and becomes the 19th emperor of Japan.", "Rabbula becomes bishop of Edessa.", "The Conference of Carthage on donatism."], "birth": ["Peter the Iberian, Georgian theologian and saint (approximate date)"]}, "412": {"death": ["Qifu Gangui, prince of the Xianbei state Western Qin", "Sarus, Gothic chieftain", "October 15 \u2013 Theophilus, Patriarch of Alexandria", "Uldin, chieftain of the Huns", "Wang Shen'ai, empress of the Jin Dynasty (born 384)"], "event": ["The Visigoths, led by king Ataulf, move into the south of Gaul. He established his residence at Narbonne and makes an alliance with emperor Honorius against the usurper Jovinus.", "Emperor Jovinus elevates his brother Sebastianus as co-emperor (Augustus) and takes control of Gaul.", "Heraclianus, governor (Comes Africae), revolts against Honorius and proclaimed himself Augustus. He interrupts the grain supply to Rome. Honorius condems him and his supporters to death with an edict at Ravenna.", "The Theodosian Walls are constructed at Constantinople during the reign of emperor Theodosius II. The work is carried out under supervision of Anthemius, notable praetorian prefect of the East.", "Winter \u2013 Olympiodorus, historical writer, is sent on an embassy by Honorius and sails in stormy weather around Greece up the Black Sea to meet the Huns who are located on the middle Danube (modern Bulgaria).[1]", "The forts on the west bank of the Danube, which were destroyed by the Huns, are rebuilt, and a new Danubian fleet is launched.", "An edict of Honorius outlaws Donatism.", "Cyril of Alexandria becomes Patriarch of Alexandria.", "Lazarus, bishop of Aix-en-Provence, and Herod, bishop of Arles, are expelled from their sees on a charge of Manichaeism.", "Fa-Hien, Chinese Buddhist monk, spends 2 years in Ceylon and is more than 200 days at sea as storms drive his ship off its course, but returns with sacred Buddhist texts back to China (see 414)."], "birth": ["Lu Huinan, empress dowager of the Liu Song Dynasty (d. 466)", "February 8 \u2013 Proclus, Greek Neoplatonist philosopher (d. 485)"]}, "413": {"death": ["Chandragupta II, emperor of the Gupta Empire", "Gwanggaeto the Great, king of Goguryeo (b. 374)", "March 7 \u2013 Heraclianus, Roman usurper", "Jovinus, Roman usurper of Gaul", "Kumarajiva, Buddhist monk and translator (b. 344)", "September 12 \u2013 Marcellinus of Carthage, martyr and saint", "Prudentius, Roman Christian poet (b. 348)", "Sebastianus, Roman usurper and brother of Jovinus", "Qiao Zong, warlord and prince of Chengdu"], "event": ["Heraclianus, Roman usurper, lands in Italy with a large army to fight emperor Honorius. He is defeated in Umbria and flees to Carthage, where he is put to death by envoys of Honorius.", "May 8 \u2013 Honorius signs an edict providing tax relief for the Italian provinces Tuscia, Campania, Picenum, Samnium, Apulia, Lucania and Calabria, who are plundered by the Visigoths.", "The Visigoths, led by king Ataulf, conquer the towns of Toulouse and Bordeaux by force of arms. After a successful siege of Valence, he captures the usurper Jovinus and his brother Sebastianus. In Narbonne they are executed and their heads are sent to Honorius' court at Ravenna.", "Kumaragupta I succeeds his father Chandragupta II as emperor of the Gupta Empire (India).", "Augustine of Hippo, age 59, begins to writes his spiritual book De Civitate Dei (City of God) as a reply to the charge that Christianity was responsible for the decline of the Roman Empire."], "birth": []}, "414": {"death": ["Synesius, bishop of Ptolemais (approximate date)", "Yujiul\u00fc Hul\u00fc, ruler of the Rouran Khaganate (Mongolia)"], "event": ["January 1 \u2013 Galla Placidia, half-sister of emperor Honorius, is married to the Visigothic king Ataulf at Narbonne. The wedding is celebrated with Roman festivities and magnificent gifts from the Gothic booty.", "July 4 \u2013 Emperor Theodosius II, age 13, yields power to his older sister Aelia Pulcheria who reigns as regent and proclaimed herself empress (Augusta) of the Eastern Roman Empire.", "Constantius III, Roman general (magister militum), begins a military campaign against the Visigoths in Gaul. He blockade the Gallic ports and besieged Marseille.", "Priscus Attalus is twice proclaimed rival emperor by the Visigoths at Bordeaux, in order to impose their terms on Honorius who has his residence in Ravenna.", "The Southern Liang, a state of the Sixteen Kingdoms during the Jin Dynasty, comes to an end.", "Fa-Hien, Chinese Buddhist monk, returns from India and begins translating Buddhist works into Chinese.", "Abdas, bishop of Susa, burns down a Zoroastrian temple; in retaliation, king Yazdegerd I of Persia orders the destruction of Christian churches."], "birth": []}, "415": {"death": ["Ataulf, king of the Visigoths", "Chandragupta II, emperor of the Gupta Empire (India)", "Hypatia of Alexandria, female Neoplatonist philosopher", "Sigeric, king of the Visigoths", "Thermantia, Roman empress", "Tufa Rutan, prince of the Southern Liang (b. 365)"], "event": ["Constantius, Roman general (magister militum), drives the Visigoths out of Gaul. He captures the usurper Priscus Attalus and sends him under military escort to Ravenna.", "The Visigoths invade the Iberian Peninsula and begin to conquer territory taken previously by the Vandals. King Ataulf and his pregnant wife Galla Placidia leave Gallia Narbonensis, they relocate at Barcelona. Their infant son, Theodosius, dies in infancy, eliminating an opportunity for a Roman-Visigothic line. Ataulf is assassinated in the palace while taking a bath. Sigeric succeeds him, but after a reign for seven days he is also murdered.", "Autumn \u2013 Wallia, brother of Ataulf, becomes king of the Visigoths. He accepts a peace treaty with emperor Honorius, in return for a supply of 600,000 measures of grain. After the negotiations he sends Placidia to Rome with hostages.", "March 18 \u2013 The Daysan River floods Edessa (Mesopotamia).", "Hypatia of Alexandria, Neoplatonist philosopher, is murdered by a Christian mob of Nitrian monks who accused her of paganism. They stripped her naked, skinned her to death with ostraca (pot shards), and then burned her remains.", "Having driven out the Jews, Alexandria's new patriarch, Cyril, has instigated the mob after taking offense at Hypatia's scientific rationalism.", "John Cassian, Christian theologian, settled at a monastery in Marseille (Gaul), he organized monastic communities after a eastern model (approximate date).", "The Eustathian schism in Antioch is healed."], "birth": ["Euric, king of the Visigoths (d. 484)", "Tonantius Ferreolus, prefect of Gaul (approximate date)"]}, "416": {"death": ["Huiyuan, Buddhist teacher and founder of the Donglin Temple (b. 334)", "L\u00fc Long, last emperor of the Chinese Di state Later Liang", "Yao Xing, emperor of the Qiang state Later Qin (b. 366)"], "event": ["Priscus Attalus, Roman usurper, is forced to participate in a triumph celebrated by emperor Honorius in the streets of Rome. After the festivities he is exiled to the Lipari Islands (north of Sicily).", "The Visigoths continue their invasion of Hispania and take control of Tarraconensis. King Wallia occupies the gold mines at Las M\u00e9dulas, and forced Jewish citizens to convert to Christianity.", "Reports of the eruption of Krakatoa are recorded in the Javanese Book of Kings.", "Rutilius Claudius Namatianus begins his journey home from Rome to Gaul. This becomes the subject of his unfinished poem, De Reditu Suo."], "birth": []}, "417": {"death": ["March 12 \u2013 Pope Innocent I", "Li Gao, Chinese general of the state Western Liang (b. 351)", "Yao Hong, last emperor of the Qiang state Later Qin (b. 388)"], "event": ["January 1 \u2013 Emperor Honorius forces his half-sister Galla Placidia into marriage to Constantius, his general (magister militum). He is appointed patricius and becomes a prominent member of the House of Theodosius.", "The Visigoths are granted Aquitaine, and become allies (foederati) of the Western Roman Empire. King Wallia establishes his capital at Toulouse.", "January \u2013 Pope Innocent I condems Pelagianism, and excommunicates the ascetic Pelagius.", "March 12 \u2013 Innocent I dies after a 16-year reign in which he has restored relations between the sees of Rome and Antioch, enforced celibacy of the clergy, and maintained the right of the bishop of Rome to judge appeals from other churches. Innocent is succeeded by Zosimus as the 41st pope."], "birth": []}, "418": {"death": ["Attaces, king of the Alans", "Wallia, king of the Visigoths", "December 26 \u2013 Pope Zosimus"], "event": ["Emperor Honorius bribes Wallia, king of the Visigoths, into regaining Hispania for the Roman Empire. His victory over the Vandals in 416, forces him to retire to Andalusia. The Visigothic territory in Gaul now extends from the Garonne to the Loire, and becomes known as the Visigothic Kingdom.", "Theodoric I becomes king of the Visigoths. He complete the settlements in Gallia Aquitania and expands his military power to the south.", "December 28 \u2013 Pope Boniface I succeeds Zosimus as the 42nd pope.", "Eulalius is elected antipope of Rome. He claims in a letter to Honorius his recognition as pope."], "birth": ["Yuryaku, emperor of Japan (approximate date)"]}, "419": {"death": ["September 28 \u2013 Eustochium, desert mother and saint (approximate date)", "Jin Andi, emperor of the Eastern Jin Dynasty (b. 382)"], "event": ["Jin Gongdi, age 33, succeeds his developmentally disabled brother Jin Andi as emperor of the Eastern Jin Dynasty. Andi is strangled by orders of the warlord Liu Yu."], "birth": ["July 2 \u2013 Valentinian III, emperor of the Western Roman Empire (d. 455)"]}, "420": {"death": ["Saint Abdas, bishop of Susa (Iran)", "September 28 \u2013 Eustochium, desert mother and saint (approximate date)", "Li Xin, duke of the Chinese state Western Liang", "Pelagius, British monk (approximate date)", "Orosius, Christian historian and theologian (approximate date)", "February 26 \u2013 Saint Porphyry, bishop of Gaza (Palestine)", "September 30 \u2013 Saint Jerome, priest and translator of the Bible", "Yao, empress consort and wife of Mingyuan", "Yazdegerd I, king of the Persian Empire"], "event": ["The legendary Pharamond leads the Franks across the Rhine. He re-colonised the old town of Duisburg (Germany).", "The Huns under leadership of the brothers Octar and Rugila expand their rule through neighbouring tribal groups.", "Yazdegerd I dies after a 21-year reign and is succeeded by his son Bahram V who becomes king of the Persian Empire.", "Abdas, bishop of Susa, is accused of burning down one of the fire temples of Ahura Mazda.", "The Jin Dynasty ends in China. Liu Yu (Emperor Wu of Liu Song) becomes the first ruler of the Liu Song Dynasty.", "The Southern Dynasties begin in China."], "birth": ["Anthemius, emperor of the Western Roman Empire (approximate date)", "Ecdicius, Roman general (magister militum) (approximate date)", "Glycerius, emperor of the Western Roman Empire (approximate date)", "Libius Severus, emperor of the Western Roman Empire (approximate date)", "Majorian, emperor of the Western Roman Empire (approximate date)", "Palladius, caesar and son of Petronius Maximus (approximate date)", "Valamir, king of the Ostrogoths (approximate date)", "Yuan Can, high official of the Liu Song Dynasty (d. 477)"]}, "421": {"death": ["September 2 \u2013 Constantius III, emperor of the Western Roman Empire", "Jin Gongdi, last emperor of the Jin Dynasty (b. 386)", "Li Xun, ruler of the Chinese state Western Liang", "Mary of Egypt, patron saint (approximate date)", "Ravina I, rabbi (teacher) and Jewish Talmudist"], "event": ["February 8 \u2013 Constantius III is appointed co-emperor (Augustus) with his ineffectual brother-in-law, Honorius, and becomes the real ruler of the Western Roman Empire.", "March 25 \u2013 Venice is founded at twelve o'clock noon (according to legend) with the dedication of the first church, San Giacomo, at the islet of Rialto (Italy).", "June 7 \u2013 Emperor Theodosius II marries Aelia Eudocia, a woman of Greek origin. The wedding is celebrated at Constantinople with chariot racing in the Hippodrome.", "September 2 \u2013 Constantius III dies suddenly of an illness, his wife Galla Placidia becomes for the second time a widow. She departs with her children Grata Honoria and Valentinian to the court of Constantinople.", "Rugila, chieftain of the Huns, attacks the dioceses of Dacia and Thrace (Balkans). Theodosius II allows Pannonian Ostrogoths to settle in Thrace, to defend the Danube frontier.", "The Franks conquer new territories in their kingdom and sack the old Roman capital Augusta Treverorum (modern Trier).", "Roman\u2013Sassanid War: Theodosius II starts a war against the Sassanids. He send an expeditionary force under command of Ardaburius, and invades Mesopotamia.", "Autumn \u2013 Ardaburius devastates Arzanene (Armenia) and forced the Persians to retreat to Nisibis (Syria). King Bahram V allies himself with the Lakhmids Arabs of Hirah."], "birth": []}, "422": {"death": ["Abraham of Cyrrhus, Syrian hermit and bishop", "Fa-Hien, Chinese Buddhist monk and traveler (approximate date)", "September 4 \u2013 Pope Boniface I", "Theudemeres, king of the Franks (approximate date)", "Wu of Liu Song, emperor of the Liu Song Dynasty (b. 363)"], "event": ["End of the Roman\u2013Sassanid War: Emperor Theodosius II signs a 100 year peace treaty with Persia after 2 years of war. He agrees a status quo ante bellum (\"the state in which things were before the war\"), and both parts guarantee liberty of religion in their territories.", "March 3 \u2013 Theodosius II issues a law to form provisions in peacetime. He instructs landowners leasing towers in the Theodosian Walls to assist with the build-up of emergency goods. Theodosius pays a annual tribute of 350 pounds of gold to the Huns in order to buy peace.[1]", "Theodosius II receives a statue at Hebdomon, military parade ground on the shores of the Propontis, just outside Constantinople. On its base (fragments are now in the Istanbul Archaeology Museum), an inscription praises him as \u201ceverywhere and forever victorius.\u201d", "The walls of Rome's Flavian Amphitheater (Colosseum) crack during an earthquake.", "The Roman army invade Gaul, they capture and execute the Frankish king Theudemeres with his family.", "Shao of Liu Song, age 16, eldest son of Wu of Liu Song succeeds his father as emperor of the Liu Song Dynasty (China).", "Petrus, bishop of Illyria, starts construction of Church of Santa Sabina (approximate date).", "September 4 \u2013 Pope Boniface I dies after a 4-year reign that was interrupted for 15 weeks by the faction of the antipope Eulalius. He is succeeded by Celestine I as the 43rd pope."], "birth": ["Casper, ruler of the Maya city of Palenque", "Genevieve, patron saint (approximate date)", "Licinia Eudoxia, Roman empress (d. 462)"]}, "423": {"death": ["Eulalius, antipope of Rome", "August 15 \u2013 Honorius, Roman Emperor (b. 384)[1]", "Ming Yuan Di, ruler of the Xianbei state Northern Wei (b. 392)", "Tufa, Chinese princess and wife of Qifu Chipan", "Xiaoyi, empress dowager of the Liu Song Dynasty (b. 343)"], "event": ["August 15 \u2013 Emperor Honorius, age 38, dies at Ravenna of dropsy, perhaps pulmonary edema. With no children to claim the throne, Joannes, primicerius notariorum (\"chief notary\", head of the civil service), seizes the throne of the Western Roman Empire, and is declared emperor. Among the supporters are Flavius Aetius, Roman general (magister militum). Joannes' rule is accepted in the dioceses of Gaul, Hispania and Italia, but not in Africa. [1]", "Winter \u2013 Emperor Theodosius II refuses Joannes to recognise as emperor and prepares for war. He mobilished a expeditionary force under command of Ardaburius and his son Flavius Aspar.", "The Pannonian Ostrogoths who have been settled in Thrace south of the Danube (see 421) by Theodosius II organize a farmers' strike. Only payment of amounts to a huge farm loan prevents them from occupying Rome.", "Theodoret becomes bishop of Cyrrhus (Syria). He converts more than 1,000 Marcionites in his diocese.[2]"], "birth": ["Theodosius the Cenobiarch, monk and founder of the Monastery of St. Theodosius (approximate date)"]}, "424": {"death": ["Shao of Liu Song, emperor of the Liu Song Dynasty (b. 406)"], "event": ["October 23 \u2013 Emperor Theodosius II nominates his cousin Valentinian, age 5, the imperial title nobilissimus Caesar (\"most noble\") of the Western Roman Empire. He is betrothed to his own daughter Licinia Eudoxia, who is only 2 years old.", "Roman usurper Joannes sends Flavius Aetius, governor of the Palace (cura palatii), to the Huns to ask for their assisstance. After negotiating, he returns back for Italy with a large force.", "Winter \u2013 A Roman army under command of Ardaburius leaves Thessalonica (modern Central Macedonia) and marched for Northern Italy where they make their base at Aquileia.", "Shao of Liu Song, age 18, is deposed by a group of high officials and succeeded by his younger brother Wen of Liu Song as emperor of the Liu Song Dynasty. Shao is exiled to Suzhou, and later killed by an assassin."], "birth": []}, "425": {"death": ["October 10 \u2013 Atticus, archbishop of Constantinople (approximate date)", "Flavius Castinus, Roman consul (approximate date)", "Flavius Gaudentius, Roman general (magister militum)", "Gamliel VI, last nasi (head of the Sanhedrin)", "Helian Bobo, emperor of the Chinese Xiongnu state Xia (b. 381)", "Joannes, Roman usurper", "Sulpicius Severus, Christian writer (approximate date)"], "event": ["Summer \u2013 Joannes, Roman usurper, is defeated at the fortified city of Ravenna and brought to Aquileia. After a humiliating parade on a donkey and the insults of the populace, he is executed.", "October 23 \u2013 Valentinian III, infant son of Galla Placidia, is installed as emperor (Augustus) of the Western Roman Empire. Real power is in the hands of his mother who becomes a regent.", "Flavius Aetius leads a force of Huns (60,000 men) into Northern Italy. He reached a compromise with Placidia in return of obtaining the rank commander-in-chief (magister militum) in Gaul.", "The Huns advance unopposed on Constantinople but are halted by a plague that decimates their hordes (see 433).", "The Sanhedrin is disbanded by the Roman Empire.", "Last known usage of Demotic script in Egypt.", "c. 425\u2013426 \u2013 Mausoleum of Galla Placidia is built.", "February 27 \u2013 The University of Constantinople is founded by emperor Theodosius II at the urging of his wife Aelia Eudocia.", "Buddhism begins to spread to Southeast Asia."], "birth": ["Zeno, Byzantine Emperor (approximate date)"]}, "426": {"death": ["Fu Liang, official of the Liu Song Dynasty (b. 374)", "Xie Hui, general of the Liu Song Dynasty (b. 390)", "Xu Xianzhi, official of the Liu Song Dynasty (b. 364)", "Zhang, empress dowager of the Liu Song Dynasty"], "event": ["Emperor Theodosius II gives orders to destroy the buildings and pagan temples at Olympia (Greece). The statue of Zeus is brought to Constantinople.", "Flavius Aetius, Roman general (magister militum), starts a 10-year campaign against the Visigoths in southern Gaul.", "King Gunderic of the Vandals accepts the request of the Alans in Hispania to become their ruler (approximate date).", "K'inich Yax K'uk' Mo' becomes the founder of the pre-Columbian Maya civilization at Cop\u00e1n (modern Honduras).", "Augustine of Hippo publishes the De Civitate Dei, City of God.", "Sisinnius becomes Archbishop of Constantinople."], "birth": ["Liu Shao, emperor of the Liu Song Dynasty (d. 453)"]}, "427": {"death": ["Guisin, king of Baekje (Korea)", "December 24 \u2013 Sisinnius I, archbishop of Constantinople", "Tao Qian, Chinese poet of the Eastern Jin Dynasty (b. 365)"], "event": ["Flavius Aetius, Roman general (magister militum), arrives in southern Gaul with an army (40,000 men) and defeats the Visigoths under king Theodoric I who besiege the strategic city of Arles.", "Bonifacius, Roman governor (Last of the Romans), revolts in Africa against emperor Valentinian III. Under the influence of Aetius, he is convicted of treason by empress-mother Galla Placidia.", "The Roman province of Pannonia Prima is finally assimilated into the Hunnic Empire.", "The Ephthalites (White Huns) invade Western Asia and reduce the Persian threat to the Eastern Roman Empire. King Bahram V sends an expeditionary force into Khorasan.", "King Jangsu transfers the Goguryeo capital from Gungnae Fortress (modern Ji'an) on the banks of the Yalu River to Pyongyang (Korea)."], "birth": ["Qi Gaodi, Chinese emperor of the Southern Qi Dynasty (d. 482)", "Wang Xianyuan, empress and wife of Song Xiaowudi (d. 464)"]}, "428": {"death": ["Gunderic, king of the Vandals and Alans (b. 379)", "Qifu Chipan, prince of the Xianbei state Western Qin", "Theodore of Mopsuestia, bishop and theologian"], "event": ["Bonifacius, Roman governor of Africa, calles in the support of the Vandals to help him with his revolt in the province. This in revenge for the hostile action of empress Galla Placidia (see 427), ruling in behalf of her son Valentinian III.", "Flavius Felix is elected consul for the Western Empire and issues consular diptychs during his political office.", "King Gunderic, age 49, dies after a reign of 21 years, and is succeeded by his half-brother Genseric. He is styled with the title Rex Wandalorum et Alanorum (\"King of the Vandals and Alans\"). Genseric increases his power and wealth in the residence of the province of Hispania Baetica (Southern Spain).", "King Vortigern invites a number of Germanic warriors to aid him in consolidating his position in Britain according to the Historia Brittonum. He hires Saxons who are probably settled in Kent as mercenaries to fight against the Picts and the Scots beyond Hadrian's Wall.", "Chlodio, king of the Salian Franks, invades Northern Gaul and defeats the Roman army at Cambrai. He extends his kingdom south to the River Somme and makes Tournai (modern Belgium) his residence. Frankish expansion changed the borders, founding Francia.", "Artaxias IV, last king of Greater Armenia, is deposed by Bahram V. The Arshakuni Dynasty ends and the kingdom becomes a province of the Persian Empire.", "October 26 \u2013 The planet Venus occults the planet Jupiter.", "April 10 \u2013 Nestorius is made patriarch of Constantinople. He preaches a new doctrine that will be called Nestorianism. It makes a distinction between the divine and human natures of Jesus but comes under immediate attack from pope Celestine I and Cyril of Alexandria.", "Hydatius becomes bishop of Aquae Flaviae in Gallaecia (modern Chaves) in Portugal.", "John succeeds Theodotus as patriarch of Antioch, and gives his support to Nestorius.", "Euthymius the Great builds a monastery in Palestine, near the Dead Sea."], "birth": ["Tuoba Huang, prince of the Xianbei state Northern Wei (d. 451)"]}, "429": {"death": ["Heremigarius, military leader of the Suebi", "January 6 \u2013 Honoratus, archbishop of Arles"], "event": ["Spring \u2013 The Vandals, led by Genseric (\"Caesar King\"), invade North Africa. They land with a force of 80,000 men including Alans, and Germanic tribesmen with their families from the Iberian Peninsula across the narrow Strait of Gibraltar. The Vandal fleet raid the coasts of the Mediterranean Sea, and blockade the grain and oil supply to Italy.", "Genseric seizes lands from the Berbers and destroys church buildings all over Mauretania. He goes on a rampage forcing Bonifacius, Roman governor, to retreat to the fortified coastal town of Hippo Regius (modern Annaba).", "Bonifacius, weakened by the civil war against empress Galla Placidia, sues for peace and is elevated to the rank of supreme commander (magister militum) of Africa.", "Emperor Theodosius II starts to reform the Codex Theodosianus in Constantinople. He establishes a committee to codify all Roman laws. All funds raised by Jews to support schools has to be turned over to the state treasury.", "A Gaulish assembly of bishops dispatch Germanus of Auxerre and Lupus of Troyes to Britain to visit the island. To satisfy pope Celestine I they combat the Pelagian heresy.", "Hilary succeeds his kinsman Honoratus and becomes archbishop of Arles.", "Domnus II, future patriarch of Antioch, is ordained as a deacon."], "birth": ["Liu Jun, prince of the Liu Song Dynasty (d. 453)", "Zu Chongzhi, Chinese mathematician (d. 500)"]}, "430": {"death": ["Abdas, bishop of Susa", "August 28 \u2013 Augustine of Hippo, bishop and theologian (b. 354)", "Feng Ba, emperor of the Chinese state Northern Yan", "Flavius Felix, Roman consul", "Nilus of Sinai, bishop and saint (approximate date)", "Octar, Hunnic ruler (approximate date)", "Plutarch of Athens, Greek philosopher", "Saint Aurelius, bishop of Carthage (approximate date)"], "event": ["Spring \u2013 The Vandals under king Genseric extend their power in North Africa along the Mediterranean Sea and lay siege to Hippo Regius (where Augustine is recently been bishop).", "Flavius Aetius gains appointment as master of both services (magister utriusque militiae) after gaining victories in Gaul over Visigoth and Frankish forces.", "The Huns led by Octar attack the Burgundians who occupied territory on the Rhine near the city of Worms (Germany). During the fightings Octar dies and his army is destroyed.[1]", "Flavius Felix, his wife and a deacon are accused of plotting against Aetius. They are arrested in Ravenna and executed. Aetius is granted the title of patricius (Roman nobility).", "Feng Ba abdicates as emperor of the Northern Yan, one of the states vying for control of China. He is succeeded by his brother Feng Hong.", "August 28 \u2013 Augustine dies during the siege of Hippo Regius at age 75, leaving behind his monumental work The City of God and other works that will have influence on Christianity.", "Saint Patrick reaches Ireland on his missionary expedition (approximate date).", "Peter the Iberian founds a Georgian monastery near Bethlehem."], "birth": ["Anastasius I, Byzantine Emperor (d. 518)", "Julius Nepos, Western Roman Emperor (d. 480)", "Marcia Euphemia, Roman Empress (approximate date)", "Sidonius Apollinaris, bishop and diplomat (approximate date)", "Song Xiaowudi, emperor of the Liu Song Dynasty (d. 464)"]}, "431": {"death": ["June 22 \u2013 Paulinus of Nola, Christian bishop and poet (b. 354)", "Qifu Mumo, prince of the Chinese Xianbei state Western Qin"], "event": ["Flavius Aetius, Roman general (magister militum), fights a campaign in Rhaetia (Switzerland) and Noricum (Austria). He is attested in the city of Vindelicia (modern Augsburg), restablishing Roman rule on the Danube frontier.", "Aetius pushes the Salian Franks back across the River Somme. King Chlodio signs a peace treaty and becomes a foederati of the Western Roman Empire.", "Hippo Regius becomes the capital of the Vandal Kingdom. After 14 months, hunger and disease the Vandals ravaged the city. Emperor Theodosius II sends a imperial fleet with an army under command of Aspar and lands at Carthage.", "Aspar is routed by the Vandals and Flavius Marcian, future Byzantine emperor, is captured during the fightings. He negotiates a peace with king Genseric and maintains imperial authority in Carthage.", "K'uk' B'alam I, the first known ruler of the Mayan city of Palenque, comes to power.[1]", "Greek Neoplatonist philosopher Proclus begins studying at the Academy in Athens.", "June \u2013 First Council of Ephesus: Nestorianism is rejected, the Nicene creed is declared to be complete. Nestorius is deposed from his see.", "October 1 \u2013 Maximianus is enthroned as Patriarch of Constantinople.", "Pope Celestine I dispatches Palladius to serve as bishop to the Irish."], "birth": []}, "432": {"death": ["Anicia Faltonia Proba, Roman noblewoman", "Bonifacius, Roman general and governor in Africa", "Helian Ding, emperor of the Chinese Xiongnu state Xia", "July 27 \u2013 Pope Celestine I", "Saint Ninian, missionary in Scotland (approximate date)", "Wang Hong, official of the Liu Song Dynasty (b. 379)"], "event": ["Battle of Ravenna: Roman forces under command of Flavius Aetius are defeated near Rimini (Italy). His rival comes Bonifacius is mortally wounded and dies several days later. Aetius flees to Dalmatia and seeks refuge at the Huns.", "Sebastianus, son-in-law of Bonifacius, becomes supreme commander (magister militum) of the Western Roman army. Empress Galla Placidia gives him considerable influence over imperial policy.", "The Huns are united by king Rugila (also called Rua) on the Hungarian Plain. He extracts annual peace payments from the Eastern Roman Empire.", "The Basilica of Saint Sabina at the Aventine (Rome), is finished by Priest Petrus of Illyria.", "The Parting of Lot and Abraham, Late Antiquity mosaic in the nave arcade, Basilica of Santa Maria Maggiore, is started to be made.", "July 27 \u2013 Pope Celestine I dies after a 10-year reign in which he led a vigorous policy against Nestorianism. He is succeeded by Sixtus III as the 44th pope.", "Saint Patrick, Scottish-born missionary, is consecrated a bishop and converts the Irish to Christianity until his death in c. 460 (approximate date).", "December 25 \u2013 Christmas is celebrated for the first time in Alexandria (approximate date)."], "birth": []}, "433": {"death": ["Juqu Mengxun, prince of the Xiongnu state Northern Liang (b. 368)", "Xie Lingyun, Chinese poet of the Southern and Northern Dynasties (b. 385)"], "event": ["Flavius Aetius returns with support of the Huns back to Italy. He gains control over emperor Valentinian III, age 14, and becomes his \"protector\".", "Petronius Maximus is appointed consul of the Western Roman Empire.", "Pope Sixtus III helps to settle a Christological dispute between the patriarchs Cyril of Alexandria and John of Antioch that has continued since the First Council of Ephesus, two years ago. They sign the \"Formula of Reunion\", thus ending their conflict over Nestorianism."], "birth": ["Liu Bing, high official of the Liu Song Dynasty (d. 477)", "Odoacer, first \"barbarian\" king of Italy (d. 493)"]}, "434": {"death": ["Helian Chang, emperor of the Chinese Xiongnu state Xia", "April 12 \u2013 Maximianus, archbishop of Constantinople", "Rugila, king of the Huns (approximate date)", "Tao Sheng, Chinese Buddhist scholar"], "event": ["Flavius Aetius, Roman general (magister militum), in the service of emperor Valentinian III, holds power in Rome for twenty years. He allows the Huns to settle in Pannonia, along the Sava River.", "Justa Grata Honoria, older sister of Valentinian, becomes pregnant from an officer in her household. The liaison shake the foundations of the Western Roman Empire. Circles in the court at Ravenna assume inevitably that Honoria is planning to raise her paramour to imperial rank and challenges her brother. Valentinian orders to execute him.[1]", "Summer \u2013 The Huns under Rugila devastate Thrace and move steadily towards Constantinople. The citizens prepare themselves for a long siege, depending on the strength of the Theodosian Walls.[2]", "Emperor Theodosius II bribes the Huns (after the death of Rugila) to keep the peace in the Eastern Roman Empire.", "The Vandals in North Africa defeat the Roman general Aspar and force him to withdraw. He serves as consul at Constantinople.", "Attila, king of the Huns, consolidates his power in the Hungarian capital, probably on the site of Buda (modern Budapest). He jointly rules the kingdom with his brother Bleda.", "April 12 \u2013 Maximianus dies on Great and Holy Thursday. He is succeeded by Proclus who becomes archbishop of Constantinople."], "birth": []}, "435": {"death": ["John Cassian, Desert Father and theologian", "Pelagius, British monk (approximate date)", "Philip of Side, Christian church historian (approximate date)", "Rabbula, bishop of Edessa"], "event": ["Flavius Aetius, Roman general (magister militum), begins in Gaul a campaign against the Burgundians. Following their raids into neighbouring Gallia Belgica by king Gunther.", "King Genseric concludes a peace treaty with the Romans under which the Vandals retain Mauretania and a part of Numidia as foederati (allies under a special treaty) of Rome.", "The Vandals use Hippo Regius (modern Annaba) as port for their expeditions. Genseric establish a merchant fleet to transport goods between Africa and the Italian mainland.", "Huneric, eldest son of Genseric, is sent as a child hostage to the court at Ravenna to secure the alliance with the Western Roman Empire.", "August 10 \u2013 A figure known to Mayanist scholars as \"Casper\" begins a 52-year reign in Palenque.", "August 3 \u2013 Emperor Theodosius II exiles Nestorius, archbishop of Constantinople, to a monastery in the Libyan desert at the behest of his sister Pulcheria.", "Ibas is elected bishop of Edessa. He becomes associated with the growth of Nestorianism and is charge of openly preaching heretical doctrines in public."], "birth": []}, "436": {"death": ["Chu Lingyuan, last empress of the Jin Dynasty (b. 384)", "Gunther, king of the Burgundians (approximate date)", "April 9 \u2013 Tan Daoji, general of the Liu Song Dynasty"], "event": ["Flavius Aetius, Roman general (magister militum), attended to put an end to Burgundian raids in Gaul. He called in Hun mercenaries under command of Attila and his brother Bleda, which plunder Augusta Vangionum, killing some 20,000 Burgundians. The Kingdom of Burgundy is destroyed, king Gunther and his family are killed. This epic disaster provided the source for the Nibelungenlied.", "King Theodoric I besiege the city of Narbonne, the Visigoths obtain access to the Mediterranean Sea and the roads to the Pyrenees.", "The Buddhist Srimala Sutra is translated into Chinese by Gunabhadra."], "birth": ["Wang Zhenfeng, empress of the Liu Song Dynasty (d. 479)"]}, "437": {"death": ["Li Jingshou, princess of the Xiongnu state Northern Liang"], "event": ["Flavius Aetius, Roman general (magister militum), secures the besieged city of Narbonne (Southern Gaul) against king Theodoric I. He concludes a peace treaty with the Visigoths, and becomes for the second time consul.", "July 2 \u2013 Valentinian III, age 18, rules as emperor over the Western Roman Empire. His mother Galla Placidia ends her regency, but continues to exercise political influence until her death in 450.", "October 29 \u2013 Valentinian III cements an alliance with the eastern emperor, Theodosius II, by marrying his daughter Licinia Eudoxia in Constantinople. This marks the reunion of two branches of the House of Theodosius.", "Ambrosius Aurelianus, leader of the Romano-British, defeats the Anglo Saxons under king Vortigern in the Battle of Wallop. He is given all the kingdoms of the western side of Britain (This according to Historia Brittonum).", "K'inich Yax K'uk' Mo' dies after a 11-year reign. He is the founder and first ruler of the pre-Columbian Maya civilization centered at Cop\u00e1n (modern Honduras).", "A synod at Constantinople attempts to impinge on the pope's rights in Illyria. Proclus tries to implement the synod's decisions, and pope Sixtus III reminds the Illyrian bishops of their obligations to his vicar at Thessaloniki."], "birth": ["Childeric I, king of the Salian Franks (approximate date)", "Saint Remigius, bishop of Reims (approximate date)"]}, "438": {"death": ["Bahram V, king of the Persian Empire", "Feng Hong, last emperor of Northern Yan"], "event": ["Emperor Theodosius II forbids the divulging of secrets of naval carpentry, probably to avoid its spread to the rising Vandal power in North Africa.", "February 15 \u2013 The Codex Theodosianus, a collection of edicts of Roman law, is published.", "Aelia Eudocia, wife of Theodosius II, goes on a pilgrimage to Jeruzalem, bringing back with her holy relics to prove her faith.", "The last gladiatorial fights are held in the Colosseum (Rome). Animal hunts continue until at least 523.", "King Hermeric of the Suebic Kingdom of Galicia is forced after a seven-year illness to retire. He hands the government over to his son Rechila.", "Bahram V dies after a 18-year reign. He is succeeded by his son Yazdegerd II who becomes the fifteenth Sassanid king of the Persian Empire.", "Relics of John Chrysostom are transported to Constantinople."], "birth": ["Epiphanius, bishop of Pavia (d. 496)"]}, "439": {"death": ["Isaac, Patriarch of Armenia (b. 338)", "Sima Maoying, empress of the Liu Song Dynasty (b. 393)", "June 9 \u2013 Spearthrower Owl, ruler of Teotihuacan (Mexico)"], "event": ["Flavius Aetius, Roman general (magister militum), lays siege at Toulouse. During the decisive battle before the walls he suffers a severe defeat, and only the heavy loss of Visigoths decide king Theodoric I to agree a provisional restoration of the status quo.", "Licinia Eudoxia, wife of emperor Valentinian III, is granted the title of Augusta following the birth of their daughter Eudocia.", "Greek becomes an official language in the Eastern Roman Empire.", "Winter \u2013 Hun and Roman envoys meet at Margum (modern Bosnia and Herzegovina), an important market town on the Sava River. After negotiations, Attila and his brother Bleda who are present, accept a four-point peace plan. Trading rights between the two states are confirmed and emperor Theodosius II pays an annual tribute of 700 pounds of gold.[1]", "King Genseric breaks his treaty with the Western Roman Empire and invades Africa Proconsularis.", "October 19 \u2013 Carthage falls to the Vandals. Genseric makes it his capital and established the Vandal Kingdom.", "The Vandals establish a North African granary that enable them to enforce their will on other nations who are dependent on North Africa for grain and other food staples.", "Winter \u2013 The Vandals conquer Sicily, Sardinia, Corsica and the Balearic Islands.", "Isaac the Great, Armenian apostolic patriarch, dies at Ashtishat. He helped to develop a Greek-inspired alphabet and translate the Bible with various Christian writings into Armenian.", "The monastery of Mar Saba is founded near Bethlehem (Palestine)."], "birth": ["Eudocia, Vandal queen and daughter of Valentinian III", "Ming of Liu Song, emperor of the Liu Song Dynasty (d. 472)", "Sabbas the Sanctified, Christian monk and saint (d. 532)"]}, "440": {"death": ["February 17 \u2013 Mesrob, Armenian monk and linguist", "Paulinus[disambiguation needed\u00a0], master of the offices in Constantinople (approximate date)", "August 18 \u2013 Pope Sixtus III", "Yuan Qigui, empress and wife of Wen of Liu Song (b. 405)"], "event": ["Flavius Aetius, Roman general (magister militum), returns as triumphator back to Rome after several years' fighting the Burgundians and Visigoths in Gaul. He is honoured by a statue erected by the Senate and by order of emperor Valentinian III.", "The Huns under Attila reappear in force along the frontier of the Western Roman Empire. They attack merchants on the north bank of the Danube and cities in Illyricum, including (according to Priscus) Viminacium, city of Moesia.", "A Vandal fleet and their allies (Alans, Goths and Moors) set out from Carthage for Sicily, the principal supplier of oil and grain to Italy after the loss of North Africa. They loot all the coastal towns and besiege Palermo. Heavily laden ships return to the court of king Genseric.", "Dynasties of the North and South: The Chinese Empire is unified by the Northern Wei Dynasty. The Northern state will have three competing dynasties\u2014Northern Wei, Northern Qi and Northern Liang, while the Southern state is dominated by the Song (or Liu Song) Dynasty.", "The Hepthalites (White Huns) move south from the Altai Mountains region into Transoxiana, Bactria, Khorasan and eastern Persia.", "A center of Buddhist studies is established at Nalanda in Bihar on the plains of the Ganges River (India).", "The Parting of Lot and Abraham, mosaic in the nave arcade, Church of Santa Maria Maggiore (Rome), is made.", "Chaturanga, Indian war game, and a ancestor of chess through the Persian game of Shatranj (or Chatrang), evolves in the Indus Valley on the Indian subcontinent (approximate date).", "August 18 \u2013 Pope Sixtus III dies after a 8-year reign in which he has resisted heresy and sponsored major construction programs in Rome. He is succeeded by Leo I as the 45th pope.", "September 29 \u2013 Leo I begins to formulate orthodoxy and condems Eutychianism, an extreme form of monophysitism which holds that the human nature of Christ is absorbed by his divine nature.", "Winter \u2013 Leo I sends a letter to Valentinian III, stating \"by the Holy Spirit's inspiration the emperor needs no human instruction and is incapable of doctrinal error\"."], "birth": ["Bodhidharma, semi-legendary Buddhist monk (approximate date)", "Childeric I, king of the Salian Franks (approximate date)", "Euric, Visigothic king and son of Theodoric I (d. 484)", "Gaudentius, son of Flavius Aetius (approximate date)", "Qi Wudi, Chinese emperor of the Southern Qi Dynasty (d. 493)", "Tonantius Ferreolus, Gallo-Roman senator and prefect of Gaul", "Vakhtang I, king of Iberia (modern Georgia) (approximate date)", "Wei Wenchengdi, emperor of the Northern Wei Dynasty (d. 465)"]}, "441": {"death": ["Hermeric, king of the Suebi", "John, Patriarch of Antioch"], "event": ["Chrysaphius, chief minister, persuades emperor Theodosius II at Constantinople to dismiss his sister Pulcheria for her policy to exile the Jews and destroy their synagogues.", "Theodosius II sends the Eastern imperial fleet under the command of the Romano-Goth Areobindus into Sicilian waters, taking the Vandals by surprise.", "Pulcheria leaves for the seaport Hebdomon (Turkey) and becomes a nun to support Nestorianism in the Holy Land (Palestine).", "German Saxons establish themselves at the mouth of the Thames River. After a period of peace, Vortimer (son of king Vortigern), defeat the Saxons in four battles in Kent (according to the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle).", "King Hermeric dies after a two-year illness, he is succeeded by his son Rechila who becomes sole ruler over the Suebic Kingdom of Galicia.", "Rechila invades Baetica and conquers the capital Seville. The Romans are driven from the Iberian Peninsula with exception of the Levante.", "November 8 \u2013 The first Council of Orange is convened under the guidance of Hilary of Arles in Orange (France).", "The Huns, led by Attila, attack Constan\u0163a (modern Romania), one of the few remaining Roman forts on the northern bank of the Danube and designated as a secure trading post. On a crowded market day, the Huns take the town by surprise and slaughter the garrison.[1]", "King Yazdegerd II of Persia signs after a short war a peace treaty with the Eastern Roman Empire. Theodosius II sends his commander, Anatolius, to conclude his terms and promise not to build any new fortifications along the border territories.", "Domnus II succeeds his uncle John as Patriarch of Antioch."], "birth": ["Shen Yue, Chinese historian and statesman (d. 513)"]}, "442": {"death": [], "event": ["Emperor Valentinian III signs a peace treaty with king Genseric, and recognise the Vandal Kingdom. He grants him sovereignty over most of Africa. Genseric gives back Sicily and Mauretania (Algeria and Morocco). This marks the end of the Vandal migrations; they settle in North Africa with Carthage as their capital.", "Valentinian III does a marriage proposal for his eldest daughter Eudocia and Genseric's son Huneric. He is already married with a Visigoth princess and Genseric decides to free him of his obligations by accusing her of trying to poison him. He led her mutilated - her ears and nose are cut off - and sends her back to her father Theodoric I, in Toulouse (Gaul).", "The Huns on campaign along the Danube and the Great Morava, destroy the city of Naissus (modern Serbia). They have mastered siege technology and are able to capture fortified cities. The Roman Senate agrees to pay Attila a tribute of 700 pounds of gold per year.", "E\u00f3gan mac N\u00e9ill, founder of the kingdom of Ailech (County Tyrone), is baptized by Saint Patrick. He becomes the first Catholic High King of Ireland.", "The Monastery of St. Shenouda the Archimandrite (White Monastery) near Sohag (Egypt) is built."], "birth": ["Feng, Chinese empress and regent of the Northern Wei Dynasty (d. 490)", "Isidore of Miletus, Byzantine architect and mathematician (d. 537)", "Placidia, Roman empress and daughter of Valentinian III (approximate date)"]}, "443": {"death": [], "event": ["The Burgundians sign a peace treaty with Rome, agreeing to serve as foederati in the Roman army. They begin to move from the Upper Rhine and Flavius Aetius, commander-in-chief (magister militum), gives them land in the Geneva area (Maxima Sequanorum).", "Period of civil war and famine in Britain, caused by rival kingdoms and Pictish invasions; the situation aggravates by tensions between Pelagian and Roman factions. Migration of pro-Roman citizens towards Gaul.", "Gunabhadra, Indian Buddhist monk, is a invited honored guest by emperor Wen of Liu Song (Liu Song Dynasty). He translates the Lankavatara Sutra from Sanskrit into the Chinese language."], "birth": []}, "444": {"death": ["Bricius, bishop of Tours", "Cyril of Alexandria, patriarch and theologian", "Juqu Wuhui, prince of Northern Liang"], "event": ["Flavius Aetius, Roman general (magister militum), settles the Alans around Valence and Orl\u00e9ans to contain unrest in Brittany.", "Eudocia, eldest daughter of emperor Valentinian III, is betrothed to Huneric, son of the Vandal king Genseric (hostage in Italy).", "Attila the Hun establishes his residence along the Tisza River (modern Hungary) and plans the coming campaign in the Balkans.", "A \"pestilence\" that is probably bubonic plague strikes the British Isles and makes the country vulnerable to internal revolts.", "The Irish city of Armagh is founded by Saint Patrick.", "Pope Leo I extinguishes the Gallican vicariate.", "Dioscorus I becomes Patriarch of Alexandria.", "The wheelbarrow invented by a Chinese artisan will gain worldwide use as a labor-saving device."], "birth": ["Xiao Ni, prince of Southern Qi (d. 492)"]}, "445": {"death": ["Arsenius the Great, Desert Father", "Bleda, king of the Huns (approximate date)", "Fan Ye, Chinese historian (b. 398)"], "event": ["Emperor Valentinian III issues an imperial edict against Manichaeism. Heavy penalties are decreed who does not denounce his religion and retain Manichaean books.", "Petronius Maximus, prominent aristocrat, is given the title of Patrician. He becomes the most honored of all non-imperial Romans and political rival of Flavius Aetius.", "Bleda, co-ruler of the Huns, dies in a hunting accident. He is possibly been murdered at the instigation of his younger brother Attila, with whom he has ruled since 434. Now about 39, Attila takes the throne for himself and becomes king of the Hunnic Empire.", "Domnus II, Patriarch of Antioch, summons a synod of Syrian bishops to confirm the deposition of Athanasius of Perrha.", "Ireland: The Diocese of Armagh is created."], "birth": []}, "446": {"death": ["Mac Cairthinn mac Coelboth, king of Leinster (Ireland)", "Proclus, patriarch of Constantinople (approximate date)"], "event": ["Germanus, bishop of Auxerre, visits Ravenna seeking to soften imperial hostility towards the Bagaudae. On his arrival at the capital, empress-mother Galla Placidia sends him a silver dish with a choice selection of prepared dainties\u2014all vegetarian, out of respect for the bishop's strict diet. Germanus petitions the Senate for leniency for the citizens of Armorica (Brittany).[1]", "The Britons and Anglo-Saxon mercenaries under king Vortigern, appeal to Flavius Aetius (magister militum of Gaul), for military assistance in their struggle against the Picts and Irish. Aetius has enough problems with Attila the Hun and is unable to send any help. (This according to Groans of the Britons.)", "The Cor Tewdws (College of Theodosius), Llantwit Major (Wales), is supposedly burned down by Irish pirates.", "The Northern Wei Dynasty begins persecuting Buddhists, having heretofore encouraged them. The drain of manpower and tax money to temples and monasteries has threatened the secular government, and the reaction is fierce: monks and nuns are murdered, temples and icons destroyed. All men under age 50 prohibited from joining any monastic order in a program that will continue until 450, helping the Confucianist philosophy of the Han Dynasty to gain dominance over Buddhism.", "A local synod is held by Turibius of Astorga.", "Flavian becomes patriarch of Constantinople."], "birth": []}, "447": {"death": ["Areobindus, Roman general (magister militum)", "Juqu Mujian, prince of the Chinese state Northern Liang", "November 27 \u2013 Secundinus (or Seachnaill), patron saint"], "event": ["January 27 \u2013 The Walls of Constantinople are severely damaged by an earthquake, destroying large parts of the wall, including 57 towers. The population is threatened by a plaque. Emperor Theodosius II orders Constantine, praetorian prefect of the East, to supervise the repairs. He employs the city's demoi (\"Circus factions\") in the work and rebuilt the walls within 60 days.", "The Huns, led by Attila, cross the Danube and invade the Balkans as far as Thermopylae (Greece). During the invasion Serdica (modern Sofia) is destroyed. For disobeying the terms of the treaty made since 442, Attila triples his demand for tribute to 2,100 pounds (ca. 700 kg) of gold per year; and the ransom for each Roman prisoner to 12 solidi.", "Theodosius II sends an embassy to Attila; Priscus of Panium, envoy for the Eastern Roman Empire, records one of few eyewitness accounts of Hun kingdom.", "Battle of the Utus: Attila defeats the Roman army near the Vit River (Bulgaria). The Huns are forced to abandon the siege of Constantinople. They marched north and plunder the defenseless Balkan provinces (including Thrace, Scythia, Moesia, Dacia and Illyricum).", "Winter \u2013 Theodosius II chooses a policy to protect Constantinople against the Huns. He removes Aspar and Areobindus (magister militum) from their military commands.[1]", "Vortigern, king of the Britons, receives the Saxon leaders Hengist and Horsa \"as friends\" and grants the brothers the Isle of Thanet, most easterly point of Kent (England).", "Merovech becomes king of the Salian Franks and founder of the Merovingian Dynasty. He settles his Frankish tribe near the Dutch river Merwede, part of the Rhine-Meuse-Scheldt delta (Netherlands).[2]", "The first entry in the Annales Cambri\u00e6 refers to this year.", "Second visit of Germanus, bishop of Auxerre, to Britain. He spiritually combat the revived Pelagian threat and expells the Irish from Powys (Wales).", "The Synod of Toledo (Spain) tries to add the filioque clause to the Nicene Creed. The Greek Orthodox Church refuses to go along with this idea."], "birth": []}, "448": {"death": ["Chlodio, king of the Salian Franks (approximate date)", "Kou Qianzhi, Chinese high official and Daoist (b. 365)", "Rechila, king of the Suebi (approximate date)", "Saint Germanus, bishop of Auxerre (approximate date)"], "event": ["Emperor Theodosius II sends an embassy to Attila the Hun; Anatolius, Roman general (magister militum) and responsible for the security of the Eastern frontier, achieves a peace treaty with the Huns in exchange for an annual tribute of 2,100 pounds of gold per year.", "Attila demands in the treaty the evacuation of the territory running from Singidunum (Belgrade, in Serbia) 300 miles east along the Danube to Novae (Svishtov, in Bulgaria). This depopulated buffer zone deprived the Romans of their natural defensive advantages.[1]", "Flavius Aetius suppresses the Bagaudae in Armorica (Gaul) and defeats the Salian Franks under king Chlodio near Arras (Belgica Secunda); the invaders are stopped around a river-crossing near Vicus Helena.", "Rechiar succeeds his father Rechila as king of the Suebi in Galicia (Northern Spain). He marries a daughter of the Visigoth king Theodoric I and converts to Catholicism.", "Kou Qianzhi, Chinese Daoist reformer, dies after having converted emperor Taiwu of Northern Wei and established Daoism as the country's dominant religion. His death presages a revival of Buddhism as China's dominant faith.", "Eutyches is accused of heresy at a synod held in Constantinople."], "birth": ["Cyriacus of Athens, Greek anchorite and saint (d. 557)"]}, "449": {"death": ["Eucherius, bishop of Lyon (approximate date)", "August 11 \u2013 Flavian, patriarch of Constantinople", "Hilary, bishop of Arles (b. 403)"], "event": ["Emperor Valentinian III sends an embassy to Attila the Hun. The purpose of the meeting is a long-running dispute over spoils of war during the Danube offensive (441\u2013442). Attila claims his lost property, but Valentinian and Flavius Aetius (magister militum) refuse this request.[1]", "Vortigern, king of the Britons, forms an alliance with Hengist and Horsa, by tradition chieftains of the Jutes, who led the Anglo-Saxon invasion of Britain. He begins an conquest that is facilitated by an epidemic plague and weakens the country (approximate date).", "August 3 \u2013 The Second Council of Ephesus opens, chaired by Dioscorus, patriarch of Alexandria. Flavian, patriarch of Constantinople, and Domnus II, patriarch of Antioch, are deposed on August 8.", "October \u2013 A Roman synod repudiates all the decisions of the Second Council of Ephesus.", "Anatolius becomes patriarch of Constantinople.", "Maximus II becomes patriarch of Antioch."], "birth": ["Kavadh I, king of the Persian Empire (d. 531)", "Qianfei, emperor of the Liu Song Dynasty (d. 465)"]}, "450": {"death": ["Chrysaphius, eunuch and chief minister", "Cui Hao, prime minister of Northern Wei", "November 27 \u2013 Galla Placidia, Roman Empress (b. 392)", "K\u0101lid\u0101sa, Classical Sanskrit writer (approximate date)", "July 31 \u2013 Peter Chrysologus, bishop of Ravenna", "Quodvultdeus, bishop of Carthage (approximate date)", "Socrates Scholasticus, church historian (approximate date)", "Sozomen, church historian (approximate date)", "July 28 \u2013 Theodosius II, Roman Emperor (b. 401)"], "event": ["Spring \u2013 Justa Grata Honoria, eldest sister of emperor Valentinian III, sends her ring to Attila the Hun in an effort to escape a marriage being forced upon her by her brother. Now about 34, she has had an affair with an officer in her household and has allegedly plotted to overthrow Valentinian, who has sent her to a convent at Constantinople. Attila announces his intention to marry her, says he expects to be given half the Western Roman Empire as her dowry, and gathers a large Hun invasion force. Flavius Aetius, Roman general (magister militum), musters in Gaul an army of Burgundians, Celts, Ripuarians, Salian Franks and Visigoths under the command of the Visigoth king Theodoric I.", "July 28 \u2013 Emperor Theodosius II, age 49, falls from his horse while hunting at Constantinople and dies soon afterward. He reigns since 408, mostly under the domination of his Christian sister Pulcheria, who has been allowed to return to court (see 441).", "August 25 \u2013 Pulcheria is forced to marry and co-rule the Eastern Roman Empire. She gives the imperial diadem to the Illyrian (or Thracian) officer and senator Marcian, age 58, and is crowned as empress in the Hippodrome at Constantinople in a first religious coronation ceremony.", "Marcian orders the execution (or assassination) of the unpopular court eunuch Chrysaphius. He discontinues the tribute payments to Attila.", "Angles, Saxons and Jutes invade Britain, marking the beginning of the Old English period (approximate date).", "Dome of Baptistry of Neon, Ravenna (Italy), is started to be remodeled (approximate date).", "King Yazdegerd II summon the leading Armenian nobles to the Persian capital Ctesiphon, pressuring them to cutting their ties with the Western Church.[1]", "Nalanda University (India) is founded (approximate date).", "Metal horseshoes come into more common use in the Near East and in Europe, increasing the efficiency of horsepower in agriculture and transportation.", "Hawaii Loa, Polynesian chief, discovers what will be called the Hawaiian Islands, he sails across 2,400 miles of open water from the island of Raiatea, near Tahiti. He settles on Hawaii, named in his honor (approximate date)."], "birth": ["Ariadne, Byzantine Empress (approximate date)", "Justin I, Byzantine Emperor (d. 527)", "Thrasamund, king of the Vandals and Alans (d. 523)"]}, "451": {"death": ["Liu Yikang, prince of the Liu Song Dynasty (b. 409)", "Nestorius, patriarch of Constantinople (approximate date)", "Pei Songzhi, Chinese historian (b. 372)", "Theodoric I, king of the Visigoths", "Tuoba Huang, prince of Northern Wei (b. 428)"], "event": ["Spring \u2013 Attila gathers his vassals\u2014Bastarnae, Gepids, Heruls, Ostrogoths, Rugians, Scirians, Thuringians, among others and smashes through Germany, causing widespread panic and destruction. He arrives in Belgica with an army (50,000 men) and crosses the Rhine.", "April 7 \u2013 Attila's forces invade Gaul and sack Metz. The major cities Strasbourg, Worms, Mainz, Trier, Cologne, Reims, Tournai, Cambrai, Amiens and Beauvais are destroyed by the Huns.", "Eudocia, daughter of emperor Valentinian III, marries Huneric in Ravenna. The engagement serves to strengthen the alliance between the Western Roman Empire and the Vandal Kingdom.", "June \u2013 Attila approaches Aurelianum (modern Orl\u00e9ans) and the city's inhabitants close the gates forcing him to lay siege. After learning of the Hun invasion, Flavius Aetius (magister militum) moves quickly from Italy into Gaul, and joined forces with the Visigoth king Theodoric I.", "June 20 \u2013 Battle of Ch\u00e2lons: Attila avoids a pitched battle near Orl\u00e9ans and withdraws to the Catalaunian Plains (Champagne-Ardenne). The Roman coalition defeat the Huns, but Theodoric I is killed in the encounter. This is the last military victory of the Western Roman Empire.", "Thorismund succeeds his father Theodoric I as king of the Visigoths. He is crowned in the capital at Toulouse and extends the Visigothic Kingdom in Hispania.", "May 26 \u2013 Battle of Vartanantz: King Yazdegerd II defeats the Armenian army (66,000 men) under their rebel leader Vartan Mamikonian on the Avarayr Plain (Armenia). Despite the loss of Mamikonian who is killed, the Armenians consider this battle to have been a moral and religious victory, since Yazdegerd, out of respect for their efforts, allows them to remain Christian. The anniversary is a national and religious holiday.", "Yazdegerd II issues an decree to abolishes the Shabbat and orders the execution of Jewish leaders, including the Exilarch.", "October 8\u2013November 1 \u2013 Council of Chalcedon, Ecumenical council of the Christian church. As a result of this council the Oriental Orthodox churches eventually become a separate communion. More immediately, Jerusalem becomes a Patriarchate and Dioscorus of Alexandria is deposed as patriarch of Antioch."], "birth": ["Jacob of Serugh, Syriac poet and theologian (approximate date)"]}, "452": {"death": ["Nan'an Yinwang, emperor of Northern Wei", "Taiwu, emperor of Northern Wei (b. 408)", "Yujiul\u00fc, consort and wife of Tuoba Huang", "Zong Ai, eunuch and high official"], "event": ["The Huns under Attila invade Northern Italy. Emperor Valentinian III flees from Ravenna to Rome and sends pope Leo I to persuade him to return to the Hungarian Plain. The cities of Aquileia, Padua and Verona are destroyed by the Huns. Milan is safed because Attila is offered a huge amount of gold. Flavius Aetius (magister militum) is unable to raise a new army against him.", "Rome is threatened by Attila but not attacked due to a last-minute effort by Leo I. Strengthened by news of reinforcements from the Eastern Roman Empire and the plague breaking out among the Huns, Attila is persuade to withdraw.", "The city of Venice is founded by fugitives from Attila's army. They flee to small islands in the Venetian Lagoon.", "King Vortigern marries Hengist's daughter, Rowena, and becomes queen of the Britons. The Anglo-Saxons increase their settlements in Britain (according to British legend).", "Nan'an Yinwang succeeds his father Taiwu after he is assassinated by the eunuch Zong Ai. Later that year, Yinwang is murdered as well, and Ai is overthrown by a group of high officials. Wei Wenchengdi, age 12, becomes the new emperor of Northern Wei."], "birth": ["John the Silent, bishop and saint (d. 558)", "Qi Mingdi, emperor of Southern Qi (d. 498)", "Wang Jian, official of Liu Song and Southern Qi (d. 489)", "Yu Zhong, official and regent of Northern Wei (d. 518)"]}, "453": {"death": ["Attila the Hun, ruler of the Hunnic Empire", "Helian, empress of Northern Wei", "Ingy\u014d, emperor of Japan (approximate date)", "Kinashi, prince of Japan (approximate date)", "Liu Jun, prince of the Liu Song Dynasty (b. 429)", "Liu Shao, emperor of Liu Song (b. 426)", "Pan, concubine of Wen of Liu Song", "July \u2013 Pulcheria, Byzantine Empress", "Thorismund, king of the Visigoths", "Wen of Liu Song, emperor of Liu Song (b. 407)", "Yin Yuying, empress of Liu Song"], "event": ["Attila the Hun is found dead in bed after a wedding feast with the Goth princess Ildica. He dies of a nosebleed at his Hungarian stronghold, drowning in his own blood at age 47 (approximate). The Huns celebrate a strava (lamentation) over his burial place with great feasting. Attila has intended to renew his attacks on Constantinople and reclaims the tribute which emperor Marcian had stopped in late 450. The Hunnic Empire is divided between his sons Ellac (appointed successor), Dengizich and Ernakh. They fight over his legacy, and establish their kingdoms north of the Black Sea (Ukraine) supported by vassal states.", "July \u2013 Empress Pulcheria dies of natural causes at Constantinople. She has commissioned many new churches in the city during her reign. Her death leaves Flavius Aspar (magister militum) as the dominant influence on her husband, Marcian.", "Theodoric II succeeds his brother Thorismund as king of the Visigoths. He is murdered after violating the alliance with the Western Roman Empire.", "Ank\u014d obtains the throne of his father Ingy\u014d after the traditional order of succession and becomes the 20th emperor of Japan. His eldest brother Kinashi commits suicide after being accused of a incestuous relationship with his sister Karu no \u014ciratsume (according to the Nihon Shoki)."], "birth": ["Brigit of Kildare, Irish patron saint (d. 524)"]}, "454": {"death": ["Ellac, king of the Huns", "September 17 \u2013 Dioscorus the Great, patriarch of Alexandria", "September 21 \u2013 Flavius Aetius, Roman general (magister militum)", "Justa Grata Honoria, sister of Valentinian III (approximate date)"], "event": ["September 21 \u2013 Emperor Valentinian III stabs his commander-in-chief Flavius Aetius to death during a meeting of the imperial council at Ravenna. He has accused Aetius of plotting against him to seize power. After his assassination the Western Roman Empire has no effective defender against its hostile barbarian neighbors (Alans, Franks, Ostrogoths, Vandals and Visigoths).", "Battle of Nedao: Allied forces of subjected peoples (Gepids, Heruli, Ostrogoths, Rugii, Scirii and Suebi) under leadership of king Ardaric defeat the Huns under Ellac, eldest son of Attila the Hun, in Pannonia. Ellac is killed during the battle and succeeded by his brother Dengizich.", "The Vandals conquer Malta.", "Ireland: The Diocese of Clogher is erected."], "birth": ["Theodoric the Great, king of the Ostrogoths (d. 526)", "Xianwen, Chinese emperor of Northern Wei (d. 476)"]}, "455": {"death": ["Biyu of Baekje, king of Korea", "Catigern, prince and son of Vortigern (approximate date)", "Heraclius, Roman courtier (primicerius sacri cubiculi)", "Horsa, leader of the Anglo-Saxons (approximate date)", "Kumaragupta I, ruler of the Gupta Empire (India)", "Niall Noigiallach, high king of Ireland (approximate date)", "Palladius, son of Petronius Maximus (approximate date)", "May 31 \u2013 Petronius Maximus, emperor of the Western Roman Empire", "Prosper of Aquitaine, disciple and Christian writer (approximate date)", "March 16 \u2013 Valentinian III, emperor of the Western Roman Empire (b. 419)"], "event": ["March 16 \u2013 Emperor Valentinian III, age 35, is assassinated by two Hunnic retainers of the late Flavius Aetius, ending the Theodosian Dynasty. Also his primicerius sacri cubiculi, Heraclius, is murdered. Valentinian is killed while training with the bow on the Campus Martius (Rome).", "March 17 \u2013 Petronius Maximus, former domesticus (\"elite bodyguard\") of Aetius, becomes with support of the Roman Senate emperor of the Western Roman Empire. He secures the throne by bribing officials of the imperial palace. Maximus consolidates his power by a forced marriage with Licinia Eudoxia, widow of Valentinian III.", "Maximus appoints Avitus, most trusted general, to the rank of magister militum and sends him on an embassy to Toulouse to gain support of the Visigoths. He elevates his son Palladius to Caesar and led him marry Eudocia, eldest daughter of Valentinian III.", "May 31 \u2013 Maximus is stoned to death by an angry mob while fleeing Rome. A widespread panic occurs when many citizens heard the news that the Vandals plundering the Italian mainland.", "July 9 \u2013 Avitus is proclaimed Roman emperor at Toulouse, and later recognised by the Gallic chiefs in Viernum (near Arles).", "August 24 \u2013 Sack of Rome: King Genseric leads the Vandals into Rome after he has promised pope Leo I not to burn and plunder the city. Genseric sacks the city for a period of two weeks. Eudoxia and her daughters, Eudocia and Placidia, are taken hostage. The loot is send to the harbour of Ostia and loaded into ships, from where the Vandals depart and return to Carthage.", "September 21 \u2013 Avitus enters Rome with a Gallic army. He restores the imperial authority in Noricum (modern Austria) and leaves a Gothic force under Remistus, Visigoth general (magister militum), at Ravenna.", "The Ostrogoths conquer Pannonia and Dalmatia.", "Battle of Aylesford: Prince Vortimer rebels against the pro-Anglo-Saxon policies of his father, Vortigern. He is defeated in the battle at Aylesford (Kent). Hengist and his son Oisc become kings of Kent. Horsa and Catigern, brother of Vortimer, are killed. The Britons withdraw to London (according to the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle).", "Skandagupta succeeds Kumaragupta I as ruler of the Gupta Empire (India). During his reign he crush the Hun invasion, however, the expence of the wars drains the empire's resources and contributes to its decline.", "Earliest recorded date at Chichen Itza on the Yucat\u00e1n Peninsula (Mexico) (approximate date).", "Barter economy replaces organized trade as Romans and other citizens desert their towns for the countryside, where they will be less vulnerable against barbarian raids (approximate date).", "The city of Vindobona (Vienna) is struck by an epidemic that spreads through the Roman provinces. The disease is probably streptococcus or a form of scarlet fever with streptococcus pneumoniae (approximate date)."], "birth": ["Wang Baoming, empress of the Southern Qi Dynasty (d. 512)"]}, "456": {"death": ["Ank\u014d, emperor of Japan (approximate date)", "Eutyches, presbyter and archimandrite (approximate date)", "Rechiar, king of the Suebi (captured and executed)", "September 17 \u2013 Remistus, Roman general (magister militum)"], "event": ["March \u2013 Emperor Marcian sends an embassy to Carthage to end the Vandal raids in the Mediterranean from their strongholds in North Africa and quells disturbances on the Armenian frontier.", "Emperor Avitus sends a Germanic naval expedition under command of Ricimer to defend Sicily. They defeat the Vandals twice; one land near Agrigento and in a sea battle off Corsica.", "Summer \u2013 Capua is destroyed by the Vandals. Ricimer is unable to end piracy in the western Mediterranean. Backed by his popularity, he gains the consent of the Senate for an expedition against Avitus.", "September 17 \u2013 Remistus, Roman general (magister militum), is besieged with a Gothic force at Ravenna and later executed in the Palace in Classis, outside the city.", "October 5 \u2013 The Visigoths under king Theodoric II, acting on orders of Avitus, invade Spain with an army of Burgundians, Franks and Goths, led by their kings Chilperic I and Gondioc. They defeat the Suebi under king Rechiar on the river Urbicus near Astorga (Gallaecia); this shatters the power of the Suebi. During the battle Rechiar is captured and later executed.", "October 17 \u2013 Battle of Placentia: Ricimer, supported by Majorian (comes domesticorum), defeats near Piacenza (Northern Italy) the usurper Avitus. They compel him to renounce the purple and Avitus is oblige to become bishop of Piacenza.", "October 28 \u2013 The Visigoths brutally sack the Suebi's capital of Braga (modern Portugal), churches are burnt to the ground.", "Saint Patrick leaves Britain once more to evangelise Ireland as a missionary bishop. The Anglo-Saxons call the British nobles to a peace conference at Stonehenge but turn on them and massacre almost everyone (approximate date).", "Ank\u014d is after a 3-year reign assassinated by the 10-year-old Mayowa no \u014ckimi (prince Mayowa) in retaliation for the execution of his father. He is succeeded by his brother Y\u016bryaku and becomes the 21st emperor of Japan."], "birth": ["Liu Zixun, prince and pretender of Liu Song (d. 466)"]}, "457": {"death": ["Avitus, emperor of the Western Roman Empire", "January 27 \u2013 Flavius Marcian, Roman Emperor (b. 392)", "October 28 \u2013 Ibas, bishop of Edessa (modern Turkey)", "Merovech, king of the Salian Franks (approximate date)", "Palladius, first bishop of Ireland (approximate date)", "Saint Proterius, patriarch of Alexandria", "Theodoret of Cyrrhus, bishop and theologian", "Valerian of Abbenza, bishop and saint (b. 377)", "Yazdegerd II, king of the Persian Empire"], "event": ["January 27 \u2013 Emperor Marcian dies at Constantinople, possibly of foot gangrene, an infection contracted during a long religious journey. He is burried in the Church of the Holy Apostles, together with his late wife Pulcheria.", "February 7 \u2013 Leo I, Thraco-Roman (or Dacian) high-ranking officer, becomes new emperor of the Eastern Roman Empire. He is first to accept the Byzantine crown from the hands of the patriarch of Constantinople.", "April 1 \u2013 Majorian is acclaimed emperor by the Roman army. After he has defeated 900 Alamanni near Lake Maggiore (Italy).", "December 28 \u2013 Majorian is crowned emperor of the Western Roman Empire and recognized by pope Leo I. His rule is accepted in Italy, Dalmatia and some territories in Northern Gaul.", "Childeric I succeeds his father Merovech as king of the Salian Franks. He establishes his capital at Tournai (modern Belgium) and becomes an foederati of the Western Roman Empire.", "According to the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle, 4,000 Britons are slain at Crecganford in battle against Hengist and his son Aesc.", "Yazdegerd II dies after a 19-year reign. He is succeeded by his son Hormizd III who seizes the Persian throne. His elder brother Peroz I rebels against him in Sistan (Iran). After months of civil war he defeats Hormizd and becomes the seventeenth Sassanid king of the Persian Empire.", "Victorius of Aquitaine computes new tables for celebrating Easter."], "birth": ["Leontia, Roman empress and wife of Anthemius (d. 479)", "Medardus, bishop of Vermandois (approximate date)"]}, "458": {"death": ["July 3 \u2013 Anatolius, patriarch of Constantinople", "Nulji, king of Silla (Korea)"], "event": ["Emperor Majorian builds a Roman fleet at Miseno and Ravenna. He strengthens the army, by recruiting a large number of barbarian mercenaries (Bastarnae, Burgundians, Huns, Ostrogoths, Rugii, Scythians and Suebi).", "Summer \u2013 The Vandals land in Campania, at the mouth of the Lire or the Garigliano River, and devastate the region. Majorian personally leads the Roman army and defeat the invaders near Sinuessa, destroying their ships on the seashore, loaded with booty.", "Battle of Arelate: Majorian defeats the Visigoths under king Theodoric II at Arles (Southern Gaul) near the Rhone River. Theodoric is forced to sign a peace treaty and becomes an foederati of the Western Roman Empire.", "Winter \u2013 Majorian enters the Rhone Valley and defeats the Burgundians under king Gondioc at Lugdunum. He force the Bagaudae to join the western coalition against the Suebi in Spain.", "Childeric I succeeds his father Merovech as king of the Salian Franks (or 457).", "The city of Tbilisi (Georgia) on the Kura River is founded by king Vakhtang I of Iberia. Its location gives it control of the trade routes between western and eastern Transcaucasia.", "July 3 \u2013 Gennadius I becomes patriarch of Constantinople."], "birth": ["Damascius, Syrian neoplatonist (approximate date)", "Xiao Zhangmao, crown prince of Southern Qi (d. 493)"]}, "459": {"death": ["Hormizd III, king of the Persian Empire (approximate date)", "September 2 \u2013 Simeon Stylites, Christian Pillar-Saint", "Vortigern, king of the Britons (approximate date)"], "event": ["Emperor Leo I signs a peace treaty with the Ostrogoths. King Theodemir sends his son Theodoric, age 5, as a child hostage to Constantinople. He learns at court about Latin, military tactics and religion (until 469).", "King Vortigern is burnt to death while being besieged by a Romano-British force under Ambrosius Aurelianus at Ganarew (Herefordshire).", "The Franks conquer the city of Trier. The Frankish Kingdom become a military power and get involved in Roman politics.", "Remigius, age 22, is elected bishop of Reims (approximate date).", "King Dhatusena of the Moriyan Dynasty rules over Sri Lanka. During his reign the Avukana Buddha Statue is built."], "birth": []}, "460": {"death": ["October 20 \u2013 Aelia Eudocia, Roman Empress and wife of Theodosius II", "Juqu Anzhou, prince of the Chinese Xiongnu states Northern Liang"], "event": ["Emperor Majorian gathers a expeditionary force (Alans and other barbarians) in Liguria and enters after a long march Aquitaine where he visits king Theodoric II at Toulouse.", "Majorian invades Hispania, his generals Nepotianus and Sunieric lead a Visigoth army into Gallaecia. The Suebi are defeated and Lusitania (modern Portugal) is conquered.", "King Genseric, fearing a Roman invasion, tries to negotiate a peace with Majorian, who refuses. The Vandals devastate Mauretania and Moorish warriors poison the wells.", "The Roman fleet, docked at Portus Illicitanus (near Elche), for the African campaign is destroyed by the Vandals. Majorian is forced to a peace treaty and returns to Italy.", "March 27 (night) \u2013 Swabians invade the Gallic city of Lugo. The governor is killed.", "The Hepthalites (White Huns) conquer the remnants of the Kushan Empire and enter India.", "A famine that will last for several years begins in the Persian Empire (approximate date).", "The remodeling of the dome of Baptistry of Neon at Ravenna (Italy), is finished.", "The Ajanta Caves (India) are completed. Cut into the volcanic rock and elaborately painted.", "The seated Buddha in the Yungang Grottoes, Datong (Shanxi), is made (approximate date).", "The Coptic Orthodox Church (Egypt) splits from the Chalcedonian Church of Alexandria.", "Gennadius I, patriarch of Constantinople, banishes Timothy II, patriarch of Alexandria."], "birth": ["Romulus Augustulus, last emperor of the Western Roman Empire (approximate date)"]}, "461": {"death": ["August 7 \u2013 Majorian, emperor of the Western Roman Empire", "Palladius, first bishop of Ireland (approximate date)", "November 10 \u2013 Pope Leo I", "March 17 \u2013 Saint Patrick, patron saint of Ireland (approximate date)"], "event": ["August 2 \u2013 Majorian is arrested near Tortona (Northern Italy) and deposed by Ricimer (magister militum) as puppet emperor.", "August 7 \u2013 Majorian is beaten and tortured for five days, and later beheaded near the Iria River (Lombardy).", "King Genseric continue the Vandal raids on the coast of Sicily and Italy. Ricimer sends an embassy to Carthago.", "Olybrius becomes second candidate for the western throne. He is the husband of Placidia held in Vandal captivity.", "November 19 \u2013 Libius Severus, Roman senator from Lucania, is declared emperor of the Western Roman Empire.", "The Visigoths under king Theodoric II recapture Septimania (Southern Gaul) after the assassination of Majorian and invade Hispania again.", "November 10 \u2013 Pope Leo I dies at Rome, age 61 (approximate), after a 21-year reign in which he has resisted Manichaeism and defended the Church against Nestorianism. He is succeeded by Hilarius as the 46th pope.", "Mamertus is elected bishop of Vienne (Gaul)."], "birth": []}, "462": {"death": [], "event": ["September 1 \u2013 Possible start of the first Byzantine indiction cycle.", "The Statue of Zeus, one of the Seven Wonders of the Ancient World, is destroyed by fire after being moved to Constantinople.", "The Daming calendar is introduced in China by mathematician Zu Chongzhi (425\u2013500)."], "birth": ["Muryeong, King of Baekje", "Anicia Juliana, daughter of Olybrius (approximate date)"]}, "463": {"death": ["Frumar, King of Southern Galicia", "Richimund, King of Northern Galicia"], "event": ["Childeric I, king of the Salian Franks, allies with the Roman general Aegidius against the Visigoths."], "birth": ["Emperor Houfei of Liu Song"]}, "464": {"death": ["Aegidius, Roman general", "Empress Wang Xianyuan", "Emperor Xiaowu of Liu Song"], "event": ["Olybrius becomes a consul in Constantinople."], "birth": ["Emperor Wu of Liang"]}, "465": {"death": ["August 15 \u2013 Libius Severus, Western Roman Emperor", "Prosper of Aquitaine, Christian writer", "Buliugu Li", "Liu Chuyu", "Emperor Qianfei of Liu Song", "Emperor Wencheng of Northern Wei"], "event": ["Basiliscus becomes a consul in the Eastern Roman Empire.", "According to the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle, Hengist and Esc slay twelve Welsh leaders near Wippedfleet.", "Song Qian Fei Di, then Song Ming Di become ruler of the Song Dynasty in China.", "Peter the Fuller becomes Patriarch of Antioch."], "birth": ["Procopius of Gaza, Christian theologian"]}, "466": {"death": ["Theodoric II, King of the Visigoths", "Liu Zixun", "Empress Dowager Lu Huinan", "Yifu Hun"], "event": ["Emperor Leo I repels the Hun invasion of Dacia.", "Euric succeeds his brother Theodoric II as king of the Visigoths.", "Peter the Fuller is deposed as Patriarch of Antioch; Julian is elected as his successor."], "birth": ["Xu Mian"]}, "467": {"death": ["Skandagupta, ruler of northern India"], "event": ["April 12 \u2013 Anthemius becomes Emperor."], "birth": ["Leo II, Byzantine Emperor", "Cerdic of Wessex, first king of the Anglo-Saxon kingdom of Wessex", "Emperor Shun of Liu Song", "Emperor Xiaowen of Northern Wei"]}, "468": {"death": ["February 29 \u2013 Pope Hilarius", "Dengizich, King of the Huns", "Gunabhadra"], "event": ["The Vandal fleet defeats the navy of Leo I in the Battle of Cape Bon.", "The Huns again invade Dacia and are once more repelled by Leo.", "March 3 \u2013 Pope Simplicius succeeds Pope Hilarius as the 47th pope."], "birth": []}, "469": {"death": ["Dengizich, King of the Huns", "Hydatius, Spanish bishop and historian"], "event": ["The Vandals invade Epirus.", "Pope Gelasius I dedicates February 14 as St. Valentine's Day, after the Roman Catholic church moves the pagan Feast of Lupercalia to the same day. - I think this is a mistake? This occurred in 496."], "birth": ["Zhou She"]}, "470": {"death": [], "event": ["Euric, king of the Visigoths, defeats an attempted invasion of Gaul by the Celtic military leader Riothamus."], "birth": ["Buddhapalita, Indian scholar", "Dionysius Exiguus, inventor of the Anno Domini era"]}, "471": {"death": ["August 25 \u2013 Gennadius I, Patriarch of Constantinople", "Aspar, magister militum of the Eastern Roman Empire (with his son Ardabur)"], "event": ["Xiao Wen Di succeeds Xian Wen Di as ruler of the Chinese Northern Wei Dynasty.", "Theodoric the Great begins his rule as Ostrogothic king.", "Acacius becomes Patriarch of Constantinople."], "birth": []}, "472": {"death": ["July 11 \u2013 Anthemius, Western Roman Emperor", "August 18 \u2013 Ricimer, strong man of the Western Roman Empire (malignant fever)", "October 23 \u2013 Olybrius, Western Roman Emperor", "Song Ming Di, ruler of the Chinese Song Dynasty"], "event": ["Relations between Emperor Anthemius and general Ricimer deteriorate completely. Ricimer proclaims Olybrius emperor, and places Rome, where Anthemius is located, under siege. Anthemius is captured and slain fleeing the city.", "Mount Vesuvius erupts."], "birth": []}, "473": {"death": [], "event": ["Glycerius is named Emperor.", "Gundobad becomes king of the Burgundians."], "birth": ["Xiao Zhaoye, emperor of China's Southern Qi Dynasty, often known as the Prince of Yulin"]}, "474": {"death": ["January 18 \u2013 Leo I, Eastern Roman Emperor", "November 17 \u2013 Leo II, Eastern Roman Emperor", "Theodemir, king of the Ostrogoths"], "event": ["Julius Nepos becomes western Roman Emperor, deposing Glycerius.", "January 18 \u2013 Leo II briefly becomes emperor.", "February 9 \u2013 Zeno is crowned as co-emperor.", "November 17 \u2013 The death of Leo II leaves Zeno sole Emperor of the Eastern Empire; his mother-in-law Verina conspires against him.", "Forty-five years of conflict between the Roman Empire and the Vandals end, when the eastern Roman Emperor Zeno's envoys conclude a peace with King Geiseric.", "A statue of a Standing Buddha from Sarnath, Uttar Pradesh, India (of the Gupta period) is made. Gupta period. It is now kept at the Sarnath Museum, Sarnath."], "birth": ["Anthemius of Tralles, mathematician (approximate date)", "Magnus Felix Ennodius, bishop and Latin poet (approximate date)"]}, "475": {"death": ["King Gaero of Baekje, king of the Baekje Kingdom of Korea"], "event": ["August 28 \u2013 Flavius Orestes forces western emperor Julius Nepos to flee and declares his son, Romulus Augustus, to be emperor.", "Euric, king of the Visigoths, returns Provence to Rome in exchange for full independence.", "January 9 \u2013 Byzantine Emperor Zeno is forced to flee from Constantinople.", "January 12 \u2013 Basiliscus is acclaimed emperor in Constantinople.", "April 9 \u2013 Basiliscus issues a circular letter (Enkyklikon) to the bishops of his empire, supporting the Monophysiste christological position.", "Bodhidharma travels to China (approximate date).", "Gongju becomes the capital of Baekje, after Baekje loses the Han River valley to Goguryeo.", "A Bodhisattva (detail of a wall painting in Cave I in Ajanta, Maharashtra, India) of the Gupta period is made (approximate date).", "The compilation of the Babylonian Talmud, the source of the majority of Jewish Halakha, is completed."], "birth": ["Clotilde, Burgundian princess", "Ita, Irish nun"]}, "476": {"death": ["August 28 \u2013 Flavius Orestes, master of soldiers of the Western Roman Empire", "Winter (or early 477) \u2013 Basiliscus, deposed Eastern Roman Emperor", "Emperor Xianwen of Northern Wei"], "event": ["September 4 \u2013 Romulus Augustus, the last traditionally accepted Emperor of the Western Roman Empire, is deposed by Odoacer. This event is traditionally regarded as the date of the fall of the Western Roman Empire and the beginning of the European Dark Ages.", "August \u2013 The usurper Basiliscus is deposed and Zeno is restored as Eastern Roman Emperor.", "The birth of Aryabhata is traditionally regarded as the beginning of the classical period of Indian mathematics and Indian astronomy.", "Emperor Xianwen, Retired Emperor of the Chinese/Xianbei Northern Wei dynasty, is murdered by Empress Feng, who then assumes regency over young Emperor Xiaowen", "Peter the Fuller is restored as Patriarch of Antioch."], "birth": ["Aryabhata, Indian mathematician and astronomer"]}, "477": {"death": ["January 25 \u2013 Gaiseric, King of the Vandals", "King Munju of Baekje, king of the Baekje Kingdom of Korea", "Timothy, Coptic Orthodox Patriarch of Alexandria", "Armatus, Byzantine magister militum praesentialis (killed by Emperor Zeno)", "Emperor Houfei of Liu Song", "Liu Bing", "Yuan Can"], "event": ["Huneric becomes king of Vandals.", "According to the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle, Aelle, king of the South Saxons, arrives in England, with his three sons, near Cymenshore.", "Song Shun Di succeeds Song Hou Fei Di as ruler of the Chinese Liu Song Dynasty.", "Shaolin Temple founded (according to the Continued Biographies of Eminent Monks (AD 645) by D\u00e0oxu\u0101n, the Shaolin Monastery was built on the north side of Shaoshi, the western peak of Mount Song, one of the four Sacred Mountains of China, by Emperor Xiaowen of the Northern Wei Dynasty in AD 477. Yang Xuanzhi, in the Record of the Buddhist Monasteries of Luoyang (AD 547), and Li Xian, in the Ming Yitongzhi (AD 1461), concur with Daoxuan's location and attribution. For alternate founding date, see AD 497).", "This year is the earliest date for the oldest known painted depiction of a horse collar, on a cave mural of Dunhuang, China, Northern Wei Dynasty."], "birth": []}, "478": {"death": ["Ailill Molt, Irish monarch", "Shen Youzhi"], "event": ["Verina, mother-in-law of emperor Zeno, attempts to kill Isaurian general Illus for turning against Basiliscus, her brother. The revolt is led by her son-in-law Marcian and the Ostrogoth warlord Theodoric Strabo, but Illus again proves his loyalty to Zeno by quashing the revolt.", "The first Shinto shrines are built in Japan.", "The Song Dynasty ends in China.", "Chinese chronicles record a memorial sent by the \"King of Japan\" (possibly Emperor Y\u016bryaku), who describes himself as \"Supreme Director of Military Affairs in Japan and Korea\" to the Court of the Northern Wei Dynasty. The Chinese Emperor responds by confirming the Japanese dynasty in those titles. This is the earliest verifiable date in Japanese history."], "birth": ["Narses, Byzantine general"]}, "479": {"death": ["King Samgeun of Baekje, king of the Baekje Kingdom of Korea", "Emperor Shun of Liu Song", "Empress Wang Zhenfeng", "Yuan He", "Emperor Y\u016bryaku"], "event": ["The Song Dynasty ends and the Southern Qi Dynasty begins in southern China. Qi Gao Di is the first ruler of the Qi Dynasty."], "birth": []}, "480": {"death": ["Julius Nepos, last legitimate Western Roman Emperor", "Skandagupta, ruler of the Gupta Empire"], "event": ["Odoacer defeats an attempt by Julius Nepos to recapture Italy, and has Julius killed.", "Odoacer captures Dalmatia.", "Ireland: The Diocese of Connor is erected.", "Narasimhagupta Baladitya succeeds his father Skandagupta as ruler of the Gupta Empire."], "birth": ["Anicius Manlius Severinus Boethius, Christian philosopher", "Damascius, Neoplatonist philosopher", "Gelimer, last king of the Vandals", "Benedict of Nursia, early monasticist (approximate date)", "Scholastica, twin sister of Benedict of Nursia", "Xiao Zhaowen, emperor of China's Southern Qi Dynasty, often known as the Prince of Hailing"]}, "481": {"death": ["Theodoric Strabo, Ostrogothic chieftain", "Patriarch Timothy III of Alexandria", "Sabinianus Magnus, Roman general"], "event": ["Clovis I becomes king of the Western Franks upon the death of Childeric I (or 482).", "Baekje, Silla, and Daegaya form an alliance against Goguryeo."], "birth": []}, "482": {"death": ["January 8 \u2013 Saint Severinus of Noricum, monk", "Emperor Gao of Southern Qi"], "event": ["Byzantine emperor Zeno issues the Henotikon, an attempt to reconcile the differences between the supporters of Chalcedonian faith and Monophysitism.", "Qi Gao Di becomes ruler of the Chinese Southern Qi Dynasty."], "birth": ["Justinian I, Emperor of the Eastern Roman Empire (approximate date)"]}, "483": {"death": [], "event": ["General Illus and Verina attempt to overthrow Emperor Zeno and place a general named Leontius on the throne. Zeno defeats this attempt.", "March 13 \u2013 Pope Felix III succeeds Pope Simplicius as the 48th pope."], "birth": ["May 11 \u2013 Petrus Sabbatius, the later Emperor Justinian I", "Xiao Baojuan, emperor of Southern Qi Dynasty, commonly known as Marquess of Donghun", "Emperor Xuanwu of Northern Wei", "Yuan Xun", "Zhu Yi"]}, "484": {"death": ["December 23 \u2013 Huneric, king of Vandals", "Euric, king of the Visigoths", "Aelia Verina, wife of emperor Leo I", "Peroz I, King of Persia"], "event": ["December 28 \u2013 Alaric II succeeds Euric as king of the Visigoths.", "Gunthamund becomes king of the Vandals.", "Gundobad proclaims the Burgundian Code", "The Hephthalites invade Persia, and Peroz I is killed in battle; Balash becomes king of Persia.", "The Nvarsak Treaty is concluded between the Persians and Armenians.", "Pope Felix III excommunicates Peter Mongus, patriarch of Alexandria, and Acacius, patriarch of Constantinople, causing a schism between eastern and western Christianity that lasts 35 years (the Acacian schism)."], "birth": ["Brendan, Irish saint (approximate date)"]}, "485": {"death": ["April 17 \u2013 Proclus, Neoplatonic philosopher", "Fincath mac Garrchu, King of Leinster"], "event": ["Aelle of Sussex fights the Brythons at the stream of Mearcread.", "Peter the Fuller is excommunicated by a synod in Rome."], "birth": []}, "486": {"death": [], "event": ["Roman rule in Gaul ends with the defeat at Soissons of the Roman governor Syagrius by the Franks under Clovis I. The land between the Loire and the Somme becomes a part of the Frankish realm.", "The Battle of Mercredesburne is fought between Aelle's army and the Britons. The battle ended in a draw."], "birth": []}, "487": {"death": ["Syagrius, \"King of the Romans\" in Soissons", "Gao Yun"], "event": [], "birth": ["Xiao Baoyin"]}, "488": {"death": ["Hengest, leader of Kent", "Peter the Fuller, Patriarch of Antioch (approximate date)", "Illus, Byzantine general"], "event": ["Theodoric the Great becomes king of the Ostrogoths.", "According to the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle, Hengist dies and is succeeded by his son Oisc as king of Kent.", "The Gepids capture Belgrade.", "Kavadh I succeeds Balash in Persia.", "John succeeds Peter as Patriarch of Antioch.", "Fravitta becomes Patriarch of Constantinople."], "birth": ["Emperor He of Southern Qi", "Empress Yu"]}, "489": {"death": ["Acacius, Patriarch of Constantinople", "Fravitta, Patriarch of Constantinople", "Peter, Coptic Orthodox Patriarch of Alexandria", "Wang Jian"], "event": ["Theodoric, king of the Ostrogoths, continues his invasion of Italy with the approval of Byzantine emperor Zeno.", "August 28 \u2013 Theodoric defeats Odoacer at the Battle of Isonzo, forcing his way into Italy.", "September 27 \u2013 Battle of Verona: Odoacer attacks Theodoric again, and is defeated a second time.", "Flavius Zeno (emperor) closes the School of Edessa for their teaching of Nestorian doctrine.", "The first Confucian Temple is constructed in north China (outside the ancestral temple at Qufu)."], "birth": ["Emperor Buretsu of Japan"]}, "490": {"death": ["Empress Feng, Chinese empress and regent (b. 442)"], "event": ["April 1 \u2013 The majority of Odoacer's army, including his magister militum Tufa, surrenders to Theodoric the Great in Milan.", "August 11 \u2013 Battle of Adda: Theodoric fends off a sally from Odoacer.", "Euphemius becomes Patriarch of Constantinople."], "birth": []}, "491": {"death": ["April 9 \u2013 Zeno, Eastern Roman Emperor", "Peter the Iberian, Georgian monk"], "event": ["9 July \u2013 Odoacer makes a night assault with his Heruli guardsmen, engaging Theodoric the Great in Ad Pinetam. Both sides suffer heavy losses, but in the end Theodoric repulses the attack, forcing Odoacer back into Ravenna.", "Aelle of Sussex besieges and conquers the fortified town of Anderitum in southern Britain.", "April 11 \u2013 Anastasius I becomes emperor."], "birth": []}, "492": {"death": ["Xiao Ni"], "event": ["Isaurian War: beginning of the revolt of the Isaurians against Anastasius I in Isauria.", "March 1 \u2013 Pope Gelasius I succeeds Pope Felix III as the 49th pope."], "birth": []}, "493": {"death": ["March 15 \u2013 Odoacer, King of Italy", "March 17 \u2013 Patrick, missionary Bishop to the Irish", "Qi Wu Di, ruler of the Chinese Southern Qi Dynasty", "Xiao Zhangmao"], "event": ["February 25 \u2013 Odoacer agrees to a mediated peace with Theodoric the Great, and is later killed by him personally. Theodoric becomes king of the Ostrogoths and moves the capital to Ravenna.", "March \u2013 The Battle for the Body of St. Patrick is fought between the Ui Neill Dynasty and the Airgialla Kingdom.", "The Frankish king Clovis I marries the Burgundian princess Clotilde.", "Isaurian War: the Roman general Diogenianus besieges Claudiopolis, but his army is blocked by the Isaurians. In his help comes John Gibbo, who wins an overwhelming victory against the Isaurians.", "Emperor Xiaowen of Northern Wei China starts adopting a sinicization policy as well as various reforms."], "birth": ["Erzhu Rong"]}, "494": {"death": ["Xiao Zhaowen, emperor of China's Southern Qi Dynasty, often known as the Prince of Hailing", "Xiao Zhaoye, emperor of China's Southern Qi Dynasty, often known as the Prince of Yulin"], "event": ["An earthquake devastates Latakia.", "Under Emperor Xiaowen the capital of Northern Wei, a state in China, is moved from Datong to Luoyang.", "Pope Gelasius I delineates the relationship between church and state.", "Gelasius canonizes Saint George.", "The Lupercalia festival is replaced by Candlemas."], "birth": ["Gildas, early British historican and priest"]}, "495": {"death": ["Fr\u00e1ech mac Finchada, King of Leinster"], "event": ["Cerdic of Wessex raids Hampshire.", "Emperor Xiaowen of the Northern Wei Dynasty builds the Shaolin temple for the monk Batuo."], "birth": ["Theodebert I, king of Austrasia (approximate date)", "Chlodomer, king of Orl\u00e9ans (approximate date)", "Husi Chun"]}, "496": {"death": ["November 21 \u2013 Pope Gelasius I", "Gunthamund, king of the Vandals", "Athanasius, Coptic Orthodox Patriarch of Alexandria"], "event": ["Battle of Tolbiac: Clovis I defeats the Alamanni, and is baptized into the Catholic faith at Rheims.", "Thrasamund becomes king of the Vandals.", "Anastasius I has Euphemius, Patriarch of Constantinople, deposed, and Macedonius II appointed as his successor. Euphemius is sent into exile.", "Kavadh I of Persia is deposed and exiled by his brother Djamasp.", "The ruling Tuoba family in the Chinese Northern Wei Dynasty change their family name to Yuan.", "November 24 \u2013 Pope Anastasius II succeeds Pope Gelasius I as the 50th pope."], "birth": ["Erzhu Tianguang", "Gao Huan"]}, "497": {"death": ["Hashim, great-grandfather of Muhammad, (possibly in Gaza)", "Yuan Xun"], "event": ["Isaurian War: the Isaurian rebels are defeated.", "The Alemanni are defeated by the Franks under Clovis I near Bonn.", "The Shaolin Temple is founded (according to the Jiaqing Chongxiu Yitongzhi). For alternate founding date, see 477).", "Aryabhata, an Indian astronomer and mathematician, calculates pi (\u03c0) as \u2248 62832/20000 = 3.1416, correct to four rounded-off decimal places."], "birth": ["Abdul Mutallib, son of Hashim", "Chloderic, son of Clovis I"]}, "498": {"death": ["November 19 \u2013 Pope Anastasius II", "Emperor Ming of Southern Qi"], "event": ["Emperor Anastasius I reforms the monetary system, using Greek numerals instead of Roman.", "November 22 \u2013 Pope Symmachus succeeds Pope Anastasius II as the 51st pope, in the official papal selection in the Lateran Palace.", "Antipope Laurentius is elected \"pope\" in Santa Maria Maggiore.", "Flavian II succeeds Palladius as Patriarch of Antioch."], "birth": ["Emperor Jiemin of Northern Wei", "St. Kevin of Glendalough (approximate date)"]}, "499": {"death": ["Empress Feng Run", "Xiaowen, reformist ruler of the Chinese Northern Wei Dynasty (b. 467)"], "event": ["Kavadh I of Persia deposes his brother Djamasp and restores himself as king of Persia.", "March 1 \u2013 During a synod in Rome, Pope Symmachus makes Antipope Laurentius bishop of Nocera in Campania."], "birth": []}, "500": {"death": ["Zu Chongzhi, Chinese mathematician"], "event": ["Possible date for the Battle of Mons Badonicus: Romano-British and Celts defeat an Anglo-Saxon army that may have been led by the bretwalda Aelle of Sussex or possibly Cerdic of Wessex (approximate date; suggested dates range from 490 to 517). This battle may have influenced the legend of King Arthur.", "Possible date at which Fergus M\u00f3r begins his reign \u2013 the historicity of M\u00f3r is doubtful.", "Approximate beginning of the Heptarchy period in the history of England.", "Approximate year of the founding of the Kingdom of Essex.", "The Frankish Kingdom is formed.", "The monument of Ale's Stones is built in Sweden (approximate date).", "Burial in catacombs ends (approximate date).", "Emperor Xuanwu of Northern Wei China becomes sovereign of the Northern Wei Dynasty.", "Uxmal is founded (approximate date).", "Traders from southern Arabia settle in northern Ethiopia."], "birth": ["Erzhu Shilong", "Procopius, historian (approximate date)", "Theodebert I, king of Austrasia (approximate date, could also have been 495)", "Theodora, empress of Byzantium", "Tribonian, jurist in the Roman Empire (approximate date)", "Bhavaviveka, Indian Madhyamaka Scholar", "Xie He, Chinese artist (d. c. 535) (approximate date)"]}}