{"-399": {"death": ["February 15 \u2013 Socrates, Greek philosopher (b. c. 470 BC)", "King Amyrtaeus of Egypt", "King Archelaus I of Macedon"], "event": ["February 15 \u2013 The Greek philosopher Socrates is sentenced to death by Athenian authorities, condemned for impiety and the corruption of youth. He refuses to flee into exile and dies by drinking hemlock.", "Sparta forces Elis to surrender in the spring.", "The Spartan admiral, Lysander, tries to effect a political revolution in Sparta by suggesting that the king should not automatically be given the leadership of the army. He also suggests that the position of king should be elective. However, he is unsuccessful in achieving these reforms, and earns the disfavour of King Agesilaus II of Sparta.", "King Archelaus I of Macedon is killed during a hunt, by one of the royal pages, his lover Craterus.", "King Amyrtaeus of Egypt is defeated in battle by his successor, Nepherites I of Mendes, and executed at Memphis. King Nepherites I, or Nefaarud I, founds the Twenty-ninth dynasty of Egypt. He makes Mendes his capital."], "birth": []}, "-398": {"death": [], "event": ["Dionysius, tyrant of Syracuse, breaks his peace treaty with Carthage and strikes at Carthaginian cities in the western corner of Sicily which have been weakened by the plague. There is a massacre of Carthaginians in many of these cities. Motya, with its fine harbour, is attacked and captured."], "birth": []}, "-397": {"death": [], "event": ["Called on by the Ionians to assist them against the Persian King Artaxerxes II, King Agesilaus II of Sparta launches an ambitious campaign in Asia Minor.", "The Carthaginians establish the town of Lilybaeum in Sicily to replace Motya.", "Himilco crosses to Sicily from Carthage with a fresh army, conquers the north coast, puts Dionysius I, the Tyrant of Syracuse, on the defensive and besieges Syracuse. However, the Carthaginian army again suffers from the plague. The Syracusans counterattack and completely defeat Himilco's army. Himilco has to escape back to Carthage."], "birth": ["Dionysius II, son of Dionysius I, tyrant of Syracuse (d. 343 BC)", "Antipater, a Macedonian general (d. 319 BC)"]}, "-396": {"death": ["Himilco, Carthaginian general"], "event": ["The Persians assemble a joint Phoenician, Cilician, and Cypriot fleet, under the command of the experienced Athenian admiral, Conon, and seize Rhodes.", "The Carthaginians are forced to abandon their siege of Syracuse (begun in 398 BC), but destroy Messina. Dionysius' first war with Carthage ends with a notable victory for Dionysius, who confines his enemy's power to an area of northwest Sicily. On his return home, the Carthaginian general, Himilco, commits suicide.", "Agesilaus II, the King of Sparta, campaigns successfully in Asia Minor against the Persian satraps Pharnabazus and Tissaphernes and inflicts a major defeat on Tissaphernes at Sardis. Agesilaus agrees to a three months' truce with the Persians under Tissaphernes, the satrap of Lydia and Caria. Negotiations conducted during that time prove fruitless, and on its termination, Agesilaus raids Phrygia, where he easily captures an immense amount of booty, since Tissaphernes has concentrated his troops in Caria.", "Marcus Furius Camillus is made dictator by the Romans. Camillus finally destroys the Etruscan city of Veii in southern Etruria as the town falls to Roman forces after what is said to be a 10 year siege. The capture of Veii and its surrounding territories marks the first major expansion of Rome which doubles its territory after this victory.", "The Romans introduce pay for their army.", "Plato publishes his Apologia, which is a defence of his mentor Socrates.", "Kyniska becomes the first woman to win an event at the Olympic Games when the horse-drawn chariot she sponsors crosses the finish line first, even though the prohibition on women competing forces her to hire a man to drive it."], "birth": ["Lycurgus, Athenian statesman and orator (d. 323 BC)", "Xenocrates, Greek philosopher and scholarch (or rector) of the Academy (d. 314 BC)"]}, "-395": {"death": ["Lysander, Spartan general and admiral", "Tissaphernes, Persian satrap"], "event": ["The Persian satrap Tissaphernes' enemy Parysatis, mother of Cyrus, succeeds in persuading Persian King Artaxerxes II to have him executed at Colossae, Phrygia (now Turkey). Parysatis cannot forgive Tissaphernes for the rough treatment he has handed out to her favourite son, the late Cyrus.", "After spending the winter in organizing a cavalry force, Agesilaus II, the King of Sparta, makes a successful incursion into Lydia in the spring.", "Tithraustes replaces Tissaphernes. An armistice is concluded between Tithraustes and Agesilaus. Tithraustes bribes the Spartans to move north into the satrapy of Pharnabazus.", "Unable to defeat Agesilaus's army, Pharnabazus decides to force Agesilaus to withdraw by stirring up trouble on the Greek mainland. He dispatches Timocrates of Rhodes to visit Athens, Thebes, Corinth, and Argos to incite and bribe them to act against Sparta. Timocrates succeeds in persuading powerful factions in each of those states to pursue an anti-Spartan policy.", "The \"Corinthian War\" begins, with Athens, Thebes, Corinth and Argos (with the backing of Persia) against Sparta. The Spartans prepare to send out an army against this new alliance, and order Agesilaus to return to Greece. Agesilaus sets out for Sparta with his troops, crossing the Hellespont and marching west through Thrace.", "The Spartans arrange for two armies, one under the Spartan general Lysander and the other under the Spartan King Pausanias, to rendezvous at and attack the Boeotian city of Haliartus. Lysander, arriving before Pausanias, persuades the city of Orchomenus to revolt from the Boeotian confederacy, and then advances to Haliartus with his troops. There, he is killed after bringing his forces too near the walls of the city.", "The Battle of Haliartus between the Spartans and the Thebans ends inconclusively. Pausanias, arriving a day later, takes back the bodies of the Spartan dead under a truce, and returns to Sparta. There, he is put on trial for his life and flees to Tegea before he can be convicted. Pausanias is replaced as king of Sparta by his son Agesipolis I."], "birth": []}, "-394": {"death": [], "event": ["The allies, Athens, Thebes, Corinth and Argos, gather a large army at Corinth. A sizable army is sent out from Sparta to challenge this force. The two sides meet on the dry bed of the Nemea River, in Corinthian territory. In the resultant Battle of Nemea, the Spartans win a major victory over the allies.", "The Athenian general Conon, the Persian satrap Pharnabazus and Evagoras, King of Salamis, win an overwhelming naval victory over the Spartans under Peisander in the Battle of Cnidus (near Rhodes). Following this victory, Conon and Pharnabazus sail along the coast of Ionia, expelling Spartan governors and garrisons from the cities, although they fail to reduce the Spartan bases at Abydos and Sestos. With the Spartan bid for building an empire crumbling, Persia gains mastery of the Aegean.", "The two sides' armies meet each other again at Coronea, in Theban territory in the Battle of Coronea. Once more, the Spartans under King Agesilaus II are successful in battle. After this victory, Agesilaus sails with his army across the Gulf of Corinth and returns to Sparta.", "The temple of Athena Alea in Tegea is burned down, but is however soon rebuilt to the designs of Scopas of Paros."], "birth": []}, "-393": {"death": ["Nepherites I or Nefaarud I, Pharaoh of Egypt"], "event": ["The Athenian general Conon and the Persian satrap Pharnabazus sail to mainland Greece, where they raid the coast of Laconia and seize the island of Cythera, where they leave a garrison and an Athenian governor.", "Pharnabazus dispatches Conon with substantial funds and a large part of the fleet to Attica, where he joins in the rebuilding of the long walls from Athens to Piraeus, a project that had been initiated by Thrasybulus in the previous year. The construction is soon completed and Athens quickly takes advantage of its walls and its fleet to seize the islands of Scyros, Imbros, and Lemnos, on which it establishes cleruchies (citizen colonies).", "Fighting breaks out in Corinth between the democratic and oligarchic parties. The democrats, supported by Argos, launch an attack on their opponents, and the oligarchs are driven from the city. These exiles go to the Spartans, based at this time at Sicyon, for support, while the Athenians and Boeotians support the democrats.", "In a night attack, the Spartans and exiles succeed in seizing Lechaeum, Corinth's port on the Gulf of Corinth, and defeat an army that comes out to challenge them the next day.", "Amyntas III, a great grandson of Alexander I, becomes king of Macedonia following the disorders that have plagued the country following the death of the powerful King Archelaus I in 399 BC.", "Upon the death of King Nepherites I, two rival factions fight for the throne; one backing Muthis, son of Nepherites I, and the other supporting Psammuthes. Psammuthes is successful, but he only manages to reign as King of Egypt for part of the year.", "Hakor overthrows his predecessor, Psammuthes, as King of Egypt claiming to be the grandson of Nepherites I, founder of the 29th Dynasty.", "Aristophanes' play, a new comedy called The Ecclesiazusae, is performed."], "birth": []}, "-392": {"death": ["Conon, Athenian general"], "event": ["The Persian general, Struthas is dispatched by King Artaxerxes II to take command of the satrapy of Sardis, replacing Tiribazus, and to pursue an anti-Spartan policy.", "The Spartans dispatch an ambassador, Antalcidas, to the Persian satrap Tiribazus, hoping to turn the Persians against the allies by informing them of Conon's use of the Persian fleet to begin rebuilding the Athenian empire. Learning of this, the Athenians send an embassy led by Conon to present their case to the Persians at Sardis. Alarmed by Conon's actions, Tiribazus arrests him, and secretly provides the Spartans with money to equip a fleet. Although Conon quickly escapes, he dies in Cyprus without returning to Athens.", "A peace conference between the Greek city-states is held in Sparta. Andocides, Athenian orator and politician, goes with three colleagues to negotiate peace with Sparta. The conference is unsuccessful and Athens rejects the terms and exiles the ambassadors.", "Dionysius I of Syracuse, having increased his power over the native Sicilians (Sicels), is now attacked by a second Carthaginian expedition. He is forced to ally himself with the Sicels. The Carthaginian army, under Mago, is defeated, makes peace, and returns to Carthage. The treaty with Carthage is advantageous to Dionysius.", "Isocrates sets up a school of rhetoric in Chios."], "birth": []}, "-391": {"death": ["Thibron, Spartan general", "Mozi, Chinese philosopher (approximate date) (b. c. 470 BC)"], "event": ["The Persian satrap, Struthas, pursues an anti-Spartan policy, prompting the Spartans to order their governor to the Greek cities of Ionia, Thibron, to attack him. Thibron successfully ravages Persian territory for a time, but is killed, along with a number of his men, when Struthas ambushes them.", "Evagoras of Salamis and the Persians battle each other for control of Cyprus. Aided by the Athenians and the Egyptians, Evagoras extends his rule over the greater part of Cyprus and to several cities of Anatolia.", "The Athenian general, Iphicrates, with a force composed almost entirely of light troops and peltasts (javelin throwers), wins a decisive victory against the Spartan regiment that has been stationed at Lechaeum in the Battle of Lechaeum. This is the first time that a force of light infantry defeats a unit of Greek hoplites.", "Iphicrates also campaigns against Phlius and Arcadia, decisively defeating their armies and plundering the territory of the Arcadians when they refuse to engage his troops. After this victory, an Argive army marches to Corinth, and, seizing the Acrocorinth, effectively merges Argos and Corinth.", "Dionysius I, tyrant of Syracuse, begins an attempt to extend his rule to the Greek cities of southern Italy. He unsuccessfully besieges Rhegium.", "The Roman dictator Marcus Furius Camillus is accused of making an unfair distribution of the spoils of his victory at Veii. He goes into voluntary exile.", "Quintus Fabius Ambustus and two other Fabii are sent as ambassadors by Rome to a wandering tribe of Celts (whom the Romans call Gauls), under Brennus, who are advancing down the Tiber while the Celtic army is besieging Clusium. After Quintus Fabius' group become involved in a skirmish with the Gauls and kill one of the Gauls' leaders, the offended Gauls demand that Rome surrender the Fabii members to them. The Romans refuse, so the Gauls advance on Rome."], "birth": []}, "-390": {"death": ["Andocides, Athenian orator and politician (b. 440 BC)"], "event": ["July 18 \u2013 Battle of the Allia: Brennus, a chieftain of the Senones of the Adriatic coast of Italy, leads an army of Cisalpine Gauls in their attack on Rome. They capture the entire city of Rome except for the Capitoline Hill, which is successfully held against them. However, seeing their city devastated, the Romans attempt to buy their salvation from Brennus. The Romans agree to pay one thousand pounds weight of gold.", "While Brennus is arguing over the weight of the gold with the Romans, the exiled dictator Marcus Furius Camillus appears with an army and refuses to allow him to take the gold. In an initial battle through Rome's streets, the Gauls are ejected from the city and in a second battle away from the city, Camillus defeats the invaders, earning the title of the \"Second Founder of Rome\" for saving the city.", "The Pharaoh of Egypt, Hakor (Akoris), concludes a tripartite alliance with Evagoras, king of Cyprus, and Athens.", "The Temple of Aesculapius is built at Epidaurus."], "birth": ["The Tollund Man (approximate date, based on his being forty years old at the time of death)"]}, "-389": {"death": [], "event": ["A Spartan expeditionary force under King Agesilaus II crosses the Gulf of Corinth to attack Acarnania, an ally of the anti-Spartan coalition. Agesilaus is eventually able to draw them into a pitched battle, in which the Acarnanians are routed.", "The Athenian general, Thrasybulus, leads a force of triremes to levy tribute from cities around the Aegean and support Rhodes, where a democratic government is struggling against Sparta. On this campaign, Thrasybulus captures Byzantium, imposes a duty on ships passing through the Hellespont, and collects tribute from many of the islands of the Aegean.", "Wu Qi, the Prime Minister of the State of Chu, enacts his first series of political, municipal, and martial reforms. Wu Qi gains the ire and distrust of Chu officials and aristocratic elite who are against his crusades to sweep up corruption in the state and limit their power. He is eventually assassinated in 381 BC at the funeral of King Diao of Chu, although his assassins are executed shortly after by the newly enthroned King Su of Chu.", "This is the latest possible date for the compilation of the historical text Zuo Zhuan, attributed to a blind historian known as Zuo Qiuming."], "birth": []}, "-388": {"death": ["Thrasybulus, Athenian general who has helped overthrow the Thirty Tyrants"], "event": ["King Agesipolis I leads a Spartan army against Argos. Since no Argive army challenges him, he plunders the countryside for a time, and then, after receiving several unfavorable omens, returns to Sparta.", "The Athenian general, Thrasybulus, sails to Lesbos, where, with the support of the Mytileneans, he defeats the Spartan forces on the island and wins over a number of cities. While still on Lesbos, however, Thrasybulus is killed by raiders from the city of Aspendus where his financial exactions has made him unpopular.", "Concerned about the revival of Athenian imperialist ambitions, the Persian King Artaxerxes II and King Agesilaus II of Sparta enter into an alliance. Sparta also seeks and gains the support of Dionysius I of Syracuse.", "Plato, having left Athens on Socrates' death to visit Megara and possibly Egypt, travels to Syracuse at the invitation of Dionysius I's brother-in-law Dion.", "Aristophanes' play Plutus is performed."], "birth": []}, "-387": {"death": ["Wen, marquis of the State of Wen, China"], "event": ["Antalcidas, commander of the Spartan navy, actively assists Persia against Athens. After escaping from the Athenian blockade at Abydos, he attacks and defeats a small Athenian force, then joins his fleet with a supporting fleet sent from Syracuse. With this force, which is soon further augmented with ships supplied by the Persian satraps of the region, he sails to the Hellespont, where he is in a position to cut off the trade routes that bring grain to Athens.", "The Persians, unnerved by some of Athens' actions, including supporting King Evagoras of Cyprus and Pharaoh Hakor of Egypt (both of whom are at war with Persia), decide that their policy of weakening Sparta by supporting its enemies is no longer wise. So Antalcidas enters into negotiations with the Persian satrap Tiribazus and reaches an agreement under which the Persians will enter into the war on the Spartan side if the allies refuse to make peace.", "With Antalcidas' Spartan fleet in control of the Hellespont, Sparta deprives Athens of her Bosporus trade and tolls. The Athenians, mindful of being in a similarly serious situation as when defeated in the Peloponnesian War less than two decades before and facing Persian intervention on Sparta's side, are thereby ready to make peace.", "With the support of the Persian King Artaxerxes II, King Agesilaus II of Sparta concludes \"the King's Peace\" (or the Peace of Antalcidas, after the Spartan envoy and commander) with Greek allied forces in a manner favourable to Sparta. Under the Peace, all the Asiatic mainland and Cyprus remain under Persian control, Lemnos, Imbros, and Scyros remain Athenian dependencies, and all the other Greek states are to receive autonomy. By the King's Peace, the Persians become key players in Greek politics.", "Under the threat of Spartan intervention, Thebes disbands its league, and Argos and Corinth end their shared government. Corinth, deprived of its strong ally, is incorporated back into Sparta's Peloponnesian League. After eight years of fighting, the Corinthian War is at an end.", "Plato founded the Platonic Academy in Athens, where he taught Aristotle until 347 BC.", "With the aid of the Lucanians, Dionysius I of Syracuse devastates the territories of Thurii, Crotone, and Locri in mainland Italy. When Rhegium falls, Dionysius becomes the chief power in Greek Southern Italy. He then turns his attention to the Adriatic.", "Plato is forced by Dionysius to leave Syracuse after having exercised the right of free speech too broadly. Plato returns to Athens, outside which he founds a school.", "Rome begins to rebuild after being invaded by the Gauls under Brennus.", "Marcus Furius Camillus introduces the Capitoline Games (Ludi Capitolini) in honour of Jupiter Capitolinus, and in commemoration of Rome's Capitol not being captured by the Gauls."], "birth": []}, "-386": {"death": ["Aristophanes, Greek playwright (b. c. 456 BC)"], "event": ["Freed from Spartan attacks by the King's Peace of the previous year, Persia turns to quieting Cyprus and Egypt. Owing to the skill of King Evagoras of Cyprus and of Egypt's Greek mercenary general Chabrias, these wars drag on for the rest of the decade.", "Dionysius I of Syracuse extends the influence and trade of Syracuse to the Adriatic, planting a colony as far north as the Etruscan city of Hadria.", "The Chinese city of Handan is founded by the State of Zhao."], "birth": []}, "-385": {"death": [], "event": ["Jason of Pherae becomes tyrant of Thessaly.", "Dionysius I of Syracuse attempts to restore Alcetas I of Epirus to the throne.", "Bardyllis becomes king of Illyria and the Dardani and thereby establishes the Bardyllian Dynasty.", "Plato forms his Academy, teaching mathematics, astronomy and other sciences as well as philosophy. It is dedicated to the Attic hero Academus. Philanthropists bear all costs; students pay no fees.", "Democritus announces that the Milky Way is composed of many stars.[1]"], "birth": []}, "-384": {"death": [], "event": ["Lysias, the Athenian orator, on the occasion of the Olympiad, rebukes the Greeks for allowing themselves to be dominated by the Syracusan tyrant Dionysius I and by the barbarian Persians.", "The Greeks found the colony of Pharos at the site of today\u2019s Stari Grad on the island of Hvar, defeating Iadasinoi warriors brought in for its defence."], "birth": ["Aristotle, Greek philosopher (d. 322 BC)", "Demosthenes, Greek statesman and orator (d. 322 BC)"]}, "-383": {"death": [], "event": ["King Amyntas III of Macedon, forms a temporary alliance with the Chalcidian League. Sparta, whose policy is to keep Greeks disunited, sends an expedition northwards to disrupt the Chalcidian League, a confederation of cities of the Chalcidice peninsula, east of Macedonia.", "The Spartan commander Phoebidas, who is passing through Boeotia on campaign, takes advantage of civil strife within Thebes to gain entrance to the city for his troops. Once inside, he seizes the Cadmeia (the citadel of Thebes), and forces the anti-Spartan party to flee the city. The government of Thebes is placed in the hands of the pro-Spartan party, backed by a Spartan garrison based in the Cadmeia. Many of the previous leaders of Thebes are driven into exile. Epaminondas, although associated with the anti-Spartan faction, is allowed to remain.", "The 19 year lunar cycle is introduced into the Babylonian calendar.", "The second Buddhist council is convened by king Kalasoka and held at Vaisali."], "birth": []}, "-382": {"death": [], "event": ["The Theban general and statesman, Pelopidas flees to Athens and takes the lead in attempts to liberate Thebes from Spartan control.", "In punishment for his unauthorized action in the previous year of taking over Thebes, Phoebidas is relieved of his command, but the Spartans continue to hold Thebes. The Spartan king Agesilaus II argues against punishing Phoebidas, on the grounds that his actions had benefited Sparta, and this was the only standard against which he ought to be judged."], "birth": ["Philip II, king of Macedon (d. 336 BC)", "King Antigonus I Monophthalmus (d. 301 BC)"]}, "-381": {"death": ["Wu Qi, Chinese military general, Prime Minister of the State of Chu, also a servant of the State of Lu (born in Wei)"], "event": ["The Persian generals, Tiribazus and Orontes, invade Cyprus, with an army far larger than any King Evagoras of Cyprus could raise. However, Evagoras manages to cut off this force from being resupplied, and the starving troops rebel. However, the war then turns in the Persians' favour when Evagoras' fleet is destroyed at the Battle of Citium (Larnaca, Cyprus). Evagoras flees to Salamis, where he manages to conclude a peace which allows him to remain nominally king of Salamis, though in reality he is a vassal of the Persian king.", "Sparta increases its hold on central Greece by re-establishing the city of Plataea which Sparta has destroyed in 427 BC.", "The district of Tusculum is pacified after a revolt against Rome and conquered. After an expression of complete submission to Rome, the people of Tusculum becomes the first \"municipium cum suffragio\", and thenceforth the city continues to hold the rank of a municipium."], "birth": []}, "-380": {"death": ["Agesipolis I, king of Sparta", "Philoxenus of Cythera, Greek dithyrambic poet (b. 435 BC)", "Hakor, king of the Twenty-ninth dynasty of Egypt", "Nefaarud II, son of Hakor and last king of the Twenty-ninth dynasty"], "event": ["Persia forces the Athenians to withdraw their general Chabrias from Egypt. Chabrias has been successfully supporting the Egyptian Pharaohs in maintaining their independence from the Persian Empire.", "The Egyptian Pharaoh Hakor dies and is succeeded by his son Nepherites II, but he is overthrown by Nectanebo I within the year, ending the Twenty-ninth dynasty of Egypt. Nectanabo (or more properly Nekhtnebef) becomes the first Pharaoh of the Thirtieth dynasty of Egypt.", "Cleombrotus I succeeds his brother Agesipolis I as king of Sparta.", "What some historians call the Rich style in Greece comes to an end."], "birth": ["King Darius III of Persia (d. 330 BC) (approximate date)", "Pytheas, Greek explorer, who will explore northwestern Europe, including the British Isles (d. c. 310 BC) (approximate date)"]}, "-379": {"death": [], "event": ["Sparta suppresses the Chalcidian League and imposes terms favourable to King Amyntas III of Macedonia.", "A small group of Theban exiles, led by Pelopidas, infiltrate the city of Thebes and assassinate the leaders of the pro-Spartan government. Epaminondas and Gorgidas lead a group of young men who break into the city's armories, take weapons, and surround the Spartans on the Cadmea, assisted by a force of Athenian hoplites. In the Theban assembly the next day, Epaminondas and Gorgidas bring Pelopidas and his men before the audience and exhort the Thebans to fight for their freedom. The assembly respond by acclaiming Pelopidas and his men as liberators. Fearing for their lives, the Spartan garrison surrender and are evacuated. The Thebans of the pro-Spartan party are also allowed to surrender; they are subsequently executed.", "The Thebans are able to reconstitute their old Boeotian confederacy in a new, democratic form. The cities of Boeotia unite as a federation with an executive body composed of seven generals, or Boeotarchs, elected from seven districts throughout Boeotia."], "birth": []}, "-378": {"death": [], "event": ["The Theban general and statesman, Epaminondas, takes command of Thebes. Pelopidas is elected boeotarch, or chief magistrate, of the city.", "Timotheus, the son of the Athenian general Conon, is elected strategos of Athens.", "A Spartan attempt to seize Piraeus brings Athens closer to Thebes. The Athenian mercenary, Chabrias, defeats the Spartans in the battle. In fighting the battle, Chabrias invents a new defensive technique; he orders each soldier to receive a charge kneeling on his left knee, with his shield resting on the ground and spear pointed at the enemy.", "Athens allies itself with Thebes and forms the Second Athenian Empire. The confederacy includes most of the Boeotian cities and some of the Ionian islands.", "Dionysius I's third war with Carthage proves disastrous. He suffers a crushing defeat at Cronium and is forced to pay an indemnity of 1,000 talents and cede the territory west of the Halycus River to the Carthaginians."], "birth": []}, "-377": {"death": [], "event": ["Mausolus is appointed as the Persian satrap of Caria.", "Timotheus wins over the Acarnanians and Molossians as friends of Athens.", "Athens, in preparing for participation in the Spartan-Theban struggle, reorganises its finances and its taxation, inaugurating a system whereby the richer citizens are responsible for the collection of taxes from the less rich.", "The Peace of Antalcidas (387 BC), includes a clause guaranteeing the Greek cities their independence. The Spartan King Agesilaus II uses this clause as an excuse to force the dissolution of Thebes' Boeotian League. In two sieges, he reduces Thebes to near starvation."], "birth": []}, "-376": {"death": ["Zhou An Wang, king of the Chinese Zhou Dynasty"], "event": ["The Athenian admiral Chabrias wins a naval victory for Athens over the Spartan fleet, off the island of Naxos (the Battle of Naxos). The battle is brought on by the Athenians to break the Spartans' blockade of Athens' corn-ships from the Black Sea.", "The Thracian city of Abdera is sacked by the Triballi."], "birth": ["Olympias, wife of king Philip II of Macedon and mother of Alexander the Great (d. 316 BC)"]}, "-375": {"death": [], "event": ["The Theban general, Pelopidas, is made the leader of the Sacred Band, a selected infantry body of 300.", "Learning that the Spartan garrison of Orchomenus (in Boeotia) is leaving for an expedition to Locris, Pelopidas sets out with the Sacred Band of Thebes and a small force of cavalry, intending to seize the city while it is unguarded. However, as the Thebans approach the city, they learn that a sizable force has been dispatched from Sparta to reinforce the garrison at Orchomenus and is approaching the city. Pelopidas retreats with his force, but before the Thebans can reach safety at Tegyra, they meet the original Spartan garrison returning from Locris. In the ensuing Battle of Tegyra, the Thebans rout the larger Spartan force.", "Zhou Lie Wang becomes King of the Zhou Dynasty of China."], "birth": []}, "-374": {"death": ["Evagoras, king of Salamis in Cyprus (assassinated)"], "event": ["Athens tries to retire from the Theban-Spartan war and makes peace with Sparta. However, the peace is quickly broken.", "Sparta attacks Corcyra, enlisting Syracusan help. Athens comes to the island's aid. The Athenian general, Timotheus, captures Corcyra and defeats the Spartans at sea off Alyzia (Acarnania).", "The King of Salamis, Evagoras, is assassinated. He is succeeded by his son, Nicocles, who continues his father's liberal Hellenising policy in Cyprus, encouraged by Isocrates, who writes his Exhortation to Nicocles."], "birth": []}, "-373": {"death": [], "event": ["The Persian King Artaxerxes II launches an invasion of Egypt to bring that country back under Persian rule. The invasion is led by Pharnabazus. After initial successes, the Greek mercenaries fighting for the Persians push on towards Memphis. However, King Nectanebo I is able to gather his forces and repulse the Persian invasion.", "Iphicrates leads an Athenian expedition which successfully relieves Corcyra of a Spartan siege.", "The ancient Greek city of Helike is destroyed by a massive earthquake and tsunami.[1]", "The Temple of Apollo in Delphi is destroyed by the earthquake."], "birth": []}, "-372": {"death": [], "event": ["Jason of Pherae, the ruler of Thessaly, allies himself first with Athens and then with Macedon.", "Troilus of Elis wins two equestrian events at the Olympic Games, which leads to referees being banned from competing in the Games."], "birth": ["Mencius, Chinese philosopher (d. c. 289 BC)"]}, "-371": {"death": ["Cleombrotus I, king of Sparta (killed in the Battle of Leuctra)"], "event": ["A fresh peace congress is summoned at Sparta. At the peace conference, the Spartan King Agesilaus II (with the support of Athens) refuses to allow the Thebans to sign the treaty on behalf of all Boeotia. The Theban statesman Epaminondas, who is boeotarch (one of the five magistrates of the Boeotian federation), maintains Thebes' position, even when it leads to the exclusion of Thebes from the peace treaty.", "Thebes' actions at the peace congress lead to a war between Sparta and Thebes. The Spartans have an army stationed on Thebes' western frontier, waiting to follow up their diplomatic success by a crushing military attack. However, at the Battle of Leuctra, the Theban generals, Epaminondas and Pelopidas, win a decisive victory over the Spartans under the other Spartan king, Cleombrotus I (who is killed in the battle). Epaminondas wins the battle with a tactical innovation which involves striking the enemy first at their strongest, instead of their weakest, point, with such crushing force that the attack is irresistible. As a result of this battle, the Boeotian federation is saved.", "Athens does not welcome the Theban victory, fearing the rising aggressiveness of Thebes. After the Theban victory, the old alliance between the Persians and the Thebans is restored.", "With the unexpected defeat of Sparta by the Thebans, the Arcadians decide to re-assert their independence. They rebuild Mantinea, form an Arcadian League and build a new federal city, Megalopolis.", "Agesipolis II succeeds his father Cleombrotus I as king of Sparta.", "It is suggested that the original comet associated with the Kreutz Sungrazers family of comets passes perihelion at this time. It is thought to have been observed by Aristotle and Ephorus during this year."], "birth": []}, "-370": {"death": ["Agesipolis II, Agiad king of Sparta", "Democritus of Abdera, Greek philosopher (approximate date) (b. c. 460 BC)", "Hippocrates of Cos, Greek physician (b. c. 460 BC)", "Jason of Pherae, ruler of Thessaly"], "event": ["The Spartans under King Agesilaus II invade Arcadia. After appealing in vain to the Athenians for help, Arcadia turns to the Thebans. Epaminondas of Thebes arrives with an army, finds the Spartan have retired and follows them.", "With the support of Thebes, the Arcadian capital city of Megalopolis is completed and a democratic system is set up with an Assembly of Ten Thousand and a Council of fifty.", "The tagus of Thessaly, Jason of Pherae, dies, after making Thessaly a powerful force in Greek politics.", "The sculptor Praxiteles begins his active career in Athens (approximate date).", "Eudoxus of Cnidus develops the method of exhaustion for mathematically determining the area under a curve."], "birth": ["Marcus Valerius Corvus, Roman hero", "Theophrastus, Greek philosopher, a native of Eressos in Lesbos, the successor of Aristotle in the Peripatetic school (d. c. 285 BC)"]}, "-369": {"death": ["Amyntas III, king of Macedonia", "Theaetetus, Athenian mathematician (b. c. 417 BC)", "Zhou Lie Wang, king of Zhou Dynasty"], "event": ["After driving off the Spartan army that has threatened Mantinea, Epaminondas of Thebes moves south and crosses the Evrotas River (the frontier of Sparta), which no hostile army has breached in historical memory. The Spartans, unwilling to engage the massive Theban army in battle, remain inside their city while the Thebans and their allies ravage Laconia.", "Epaminondas briefly returns to Arcadia, then marches south to Messenia, a territory which the Spartans had conquered some 200 years before. There, Epaminondas starts the rebuilding of the ancient city of Messene on Mount Ithome, with fortifications that are among the strongest in Greece. He then issues a call to Messenian exiles all over Greece to return and rebuild their homeland. The loss of Messenia is particularly damaging to the Spartans, since the territory comprises one-third of Sparta's territory and contains half of their helot population.", "On returning to Thebes, Epaminondas is put on trial by his political enemies who charge that he has retained his command longer than constitutionally permitted. While this charge is considered to be true, Epaminondas persuades the Thebans that this has been necessary to protect Thebes and its allies and reduce the power of Sparta. As a result, the charges against him are dropped.", "In a search for a balance of power against the now powerful Thebes, Athens responds to an appeal for help from Sparta and allies itself with its traditional enemy.", "On the death of the Macedonian King Amyntas III, his eldest son Alexander II becomes king. The young king is simultaneously faced with an Illyrian invasion from the north-west and an attack from the east by the pretender of the Macedonian throne, Pausanias (who quickly captures several cities and threatens the queen mother, Eurydice). Alexander defeats his enemies with the help of the Athenian general Iphicrates, who has been sailing along the Macedonian coast on the way to recapture Amphipolis.", "Alexander of Pherae becomes tyrant of Thessaly following the death of his father. Alexander's tyranny causes the Aleuadae of Larissa to seek the help of Alexander II of Macedon. Alexander II successfully gains control of Larissa and several other cities but, betraying a promise he has made, put garrisons in them. This provokes a hostile reaction from Thebes. The Theban general Pelopidas drives the Macedonians from Thessaly.", "Pelopidas forces Alexander to abandon his alliance with Athens in favour of Thebes by threatening to support Alexander's brother-in-law, Ptolemy of Aloros. As part of this new alliance, Alexander is compelled to hand over hostages, including his younger brother Philip, the future conqueror of Greece.", "Cleomenes II succeeds his brother Agesipolis II as Agiad king of Sparta."], "birth": []}, "-368": {"death": ["Alexander II, King of Macedonia (assassinated)"], "event": ["While the previous year's intervention by the Macedonians in Thessaly is successful, after the Macedonian troops withdraw, Alexander of Pherae treats his subjects as cruelly as before. So the Thessalians seek Thebes' support. Pelopidas is sent to their assistance, but is treacherously seized and imprisoned.", "In response, Epaminondas is reinstated in command of Theban troops and leads the Theban army into Thessaly, where he out-manoeuvres the Thessalians and secures the release of Pelopidas without a fight.", "At the instigation of Alexander's brother-in-law, Ptolemy of Aloros, Alexander II of Macedon is assassinated during a festival. Although Alexander's brother, Perdiccas III becomes the next king, he is under age, and Ptolemy is appointed regent.", "Zhou Xian Wang becomes King of the Zhou Dynasty of China.", "Plato's Republic is completed. It lays down the rules for an ideal, righteous society and suggests that kings ought to be philosophers (or at least taught by philosophers)."], "birth": []}, "-367": {"death": ["Dionysius I, tyrant of Syracuse (b. 430 BC)"], "event": ["The Theban general, Epaminondas, again invades the Peloponnesus, but this time achieves little beyond winning Sicyon over to an alliance with Thebes. When he returns to Thebes, he is again put on trial, and again acquitted.", "Archidamus III, son of Agesilaus II of Sparta, commands a Spartan army which scores a victory over the Arcadians.", "Theban leader Pelopidas goes on an embassy to the Persian king Artaxerxes II and induces him to propose a settlement of the Greek states' disputes according to the wishes of the Thebans. Artaxerxes II issues an edict consisting of peace terms for the Greeks, but his edict is not obeyed by any of the Greek states.", "Dionysius I of Syracuse dies and is succeeded as tyrant of the city by his son Dionysius II. As the younger Dionysius is weak and inexperienced, Dion, brother-in-law of the elder Dionysius, assumes control and persuades Plato, whose friendship he has acquired, to train the new tyrant in the practical application of his philosophical principles.", "Dionysius II makes peace with Carthage on the same terms established after his father's defeat by Carthage in the previous decade.", "During the ten year period that Gaius Licinius (Calvus) Stolo is tribune in Rome (376 BC to 367 BC) he does much to reduce the enmity between patricians and plebs by reforming a number of laws. During his term, he proposes the Lex Licinia Sextia, which restores the consulship to the plebs, requires a plebeian consul seat, limits the amount of public land that one person can hold, and regulates debts. The patricians oppose these laws, though they are now finally passed and take effect from 366 BC.", "The temple to Concordia on the Forum Romanum in Rome is built by Marcus Furius Camillus.", "The Greek philosopher and scientist, Aristotle, goes to Athens as a pupil at Plato's Academy."], "birth": ["Ptolemy, Macedonian general, later founder of the Ptolemaic dynasty of Egypt (d. 283 BC)"]}, "-366": {"death": [], "event": ["In Persia, a number of satraps of King Artaxerxes II begin a revolt, in alliance with Athens, Sparta, and Egypt, that lasts until 358 BC.", "Athens founds the town of Kos on the island of Kos in the Aegean Sea.", "Theban leader, Epaminondas, returns to the Peloponnesus for a third time, seeking to secure the allegiance of the states of Achaea. Although no army dares to challenge him in the field, the democratic governments he establishes there are short-lived, as pro-Spartan aristocrats soon return to the cities, reestablish the oligarchies, and bind their cities ever more closely to Sparta.", "Thebes makes peace with Sparta and then turns its attention on Athens, which is trying to revive its maritime empire and is interfering in Macedonian dynastic quarrels.", "Thebes captures the city of Oropus.", "The experiment by Dion (brother-in-law of Dionysius I) and Plato to educate the new ruler of Syracuse, Dionysius II, in the practical application of Plato's philosophical principles fails and Dion and Plato are banished from Syracuse.", "The use of military tribunes with consular power is abandoned permanently and the dual consulship is restored. A new magistracy is established, which is called the praetorship. Its holder, the praetor, is elected annually by the Assembly and takes charge of civil matters, thus relieving the consuls of this responsibility. The praetor is regarded as a junior colleague of the consuls. Nevertheless, the praetor can command an army, convene a Senate or an assembly, as well as exercise the consular functions.", "Two additional aediles, called curule (\"higher\") aediles, are created in the Roman hierarchy. These are at first patricians; but those of the next year are plebeians and so on year by year alternately. They are elected in the assembly of the tribes, with the consul presiding.", "The Abduction of Persephone, detail of a wall painting in Tomb I (Small Tomb) in Vergina, Macedonia, is made (approximate date)."], "birth": []}, "-365": {"death": ["Marcus Furius Camillus, Roman soldier and statesman. (b. c. 446 BC)", "Eurydice II, Macedonian queen and mother of Philip II of Macedon", "Antisthenes, Athenian philosopher (b. c. 445 BC)"], "event": ["Perdiccas III of Macedon, son of Amyntas III and Eurydice II, kills Ptolemy of Aloros, who has been the regent of Macedon since he arranged the assassination of Perdiccas III's brother Alexander II in 368 BC. With Ptolemy's death, Perdiccas III becomes King of Macedon in his own right.", "The Athenian forces under general Timotheus overrun Samos, then occupied by a Persian garrison, after a 10-month siege.", "Etruscan actors stage the first theatrical performances in Rome."], "birth": []}, "-364": {"death": ["Pelopidas, Theban statesman (killed in the Battle of Cynoscephalae in Thessaly)"], "event": ["On the advice of the city's military leader, Epaminondas, Thebes builds a fleet of 100 triremes to help combat Athens. Thebes destroys its Boeotian rival Orchomenus.", "Philip II of Macedon, brother of the reigning king of Macedonia, returns to his native land after having being held as a hostage in Thebes since 369 BC.", "The army of Thebes under their statesman and general, Pelopidas, defeats Alexander of Pherae in the Battle of Cynoscephalae in Thessaly, but Pelopidas is killed during the battle. As a result of his loss of this battle, Alexander is compelled by Thebes to acknowledge the freedom of the Thessalian cities, to limit his rule to Pherae, and to join the Boeotian League.", "The Spartans under Archidamus III are defeated by the Arcadians at Cromnus.", "The Athenian general, Iphicrates, fails in attempts to recover Amphipolis. Retiring to Thrace, Iphicrates fights for his father-in-law, the Thracian king Cotys I, against Athens for the possession of the Thracian Chersonese. Cotys I is victorious and controls the whole Chersonese peninsula.", "Timophanes, along with a number of colleagues, including his brother Timoleon, takes possession of the acropolis of Corinth and Timophanes makes himself master of the city. Later, Timoleon, after ineffectual protests, tacitly acquiesces to his colleagues putting Timophanes to death for his actions.", "The Chinese astronomer Gan De from the State of Qi reportedly discovers the moon Ganymede, belonging to Jupiter, and makes the earliest known sunspot observations."], "birth": []}, "-363": {"death": ["Nectanebo I, pharaoh of Egypt"], "event": ["The Egyptian Pharaoh Teos (or Tachos) succeeds his father Nectanebo I to the throne. Planning a great attack on Persia, he invites Sparta to help him.", "The Theban general, Epaminondas, makes a bold attempt to challenge Athens' naval empire. With a new Boeotian fleet, he sails to Byzantium, with the result that a number of cities in the Athenian Empire rebel against their now threatened masters."], "birth": []}, "-362": {"death": ["Epaminondas of Thebes, Greek general and statesman (b. c. 418 BC)"], "event": ["Mausolus of Caria joins the revolt of the satraps of Anatolia against the Persian king Artaxerxes II.", "King Agesilaus II of Sparta arrives with 1,000 men to assist Egypt in its fight with Persia.", "The outbreak of civil war in the Arcadian league leads to Mantinea fighting alongside Sparta and Athens, while Tegea and others members of the league side with Thebes. The Theban general, Epaminondas, heads the large allied army in the Peloponnesus. He is met by Sparta (led by Spartan general Archidamus III), Athens, and their allies in the Battle of Mantinea. In the battle, Epaminondas is victorious, but is killed. His dying command to make peace with the enemy is followed by all sides and a general peace is established in Greece. The period of Theban domination of Greece comes to an end.", "The states of Qin, Han and Zhao defeat the state of Wei and Qin captures the prince of Wei. The Battle of Shaoliang is then fought between Qin and Wei, which Wei loses, whereupon Qin captures the prime minister of Wei."], "birth": ["Eumenes of Cardia, Greek general and scholar (d. 316 BC)"]}, "-361": {"death": [], "event": ["With the Persian empire weakening, revolts occur in many parts of the empire, including Sidon, a prosperous and rich Phoenician city.", "The Egyptians under their King Teos and the Spartans under King Agesilaus II, with some Athenian mercenaries under their general Chabrias, set out to attack the Persian King's Phoenician cities. However, they have to return almost at once due to revolts back in Egypt. Subsequently, Agesilaus II quarrels with the Egyptian king and joins a revolt against him.", "Callistratus of Aphidnae, an Athenian orator and general, and the Athenian general, Chabrias, are brought to trial in Athens on account of the refusal of the Thebans to surrender the city of Oropus, which on Callistratus' advice the Thebans have been allowed to occupy temporarily. Despite his magnificent oration in his defence (which so impresses Demosthenes that he resolves to study oratory), Callistratus is condemned to death. He flees to Methone in Macedonia, where he is accommodated by King Perdiccas III who draws on his financial expertise. Chabrias is acquitted and then accepts a command under the King of Egypt, Teos, who is defending his country against Persian attempts at reconquest.", "Plato returns once more to Syracuse to teach the young Syracusan tyrant Dionysius II. He fails to reconcile the tyrant to Dion, who Dionysius II banished in 366 BC. Because of this, Plato is forced to flee Syracuse to save his life."], "birth": ["Agathocles, tyrant of Syracuse (d. 289 BC)", "Lysimachus of Thrace, Macedonian officer and \"successor\" (diadochus) of Alexander the Great (approximate date) (d. 281 BC)"]}, "-360": {"death": ["Agesilaus II, Eurypontid king of Sparta (b. 444 BC)"], "event": ["With the help of King Agesilaus II of Sparta, Nectanebo II deposes Teos and becomes king of Egypt. Teos flees to Susa and makes peace with the Persians. Nectanebo II pays the Spartans 230 talents for their help.", "The King of Sparta, Agesilaus II, dies at Cyrene, Cyrenaica, on his way home to Greece from Egypt. He is succeeded by his son Archidamus III as Eurypontid king of Sparta.", "As the Illyrians attack the Molossians, the Molossian king Arymbas brings his non-combatant people to safety elsewhere. When the Illyrians have finished looting, they are burdened with booty and are thus easily defeated by the Molossians.", "The Gauls again reach the gates of Rome, but are beaten back.", "Plato writes the dialogues Timaeus and Critias, first mentioning Atlantis."], "birth": ["Callisthenes of Olynthus, Greek historian (d. 328 BC)", "Pyrrho of Elis, Greek skeptic philosopher (d. c. 270 BC)"]}, "-359": {"death": ["Perdiccas III, king of Macedonia"], "event": ["The Macedonian King Perdiccas III is killed while defending his country against an Illyrian attack led by King Bardylis. He is succeeded by his infant son, Amyntas IV. The child's uncle, Philip II, assumes the regency.", "In the same year, Philip II declares himself king of Macedonia. Amyntas IV is not judged by Philip II to be a danger and remains alive while Philip II is King of Macedonia.", "The Illyrians prepare to close in, the Paeonians raid from the north and two claimants to the Macedonian throne are supported by foreign powers. Philip II buys off his dangerous neighbours and, with a treaty, cedes Amphipolis to Athens."], "birth": ["Philip III of Macedon, brother and successor of Alexander the Great (approximate date) (d. 317 BC)"]}, "-358": {"death": ["Artaxerxes II, King of the Persia (b. c. 436 BC)", "Alexander of Pherae, Despot of Pherae in Thessaly, Greece", "Cotys I, King of Thrace", "Bardyllis, Illyrian king (killed in battle by Phillip of Macedon)"], "event": ["Artaxerxes III (\"Ochus\") succeeds Artaxerxes II as King of Persia and restores central authority over the Persian empire's satraps. To secure his throne he puts to death most of his relatives.", "Alexander of Pherae, Despot of Pherae in Thessaly is murdered by his wife's brother at her instigation.", "Cersobleptes, in conjunction with his brothers, Amadocus II and Berisades, inherits the dominions of the Thracian king, Cotys I, following his murder. However, the overall management of Thracian affairs is assumed by the Euboean adventurer, Charidemus, who is connected by marriage with the royal family, and who plays the prominent part in the ensuing negotiations with Athens for the possession of the Thracian Chersonese.", "Philip II of Macedonia invades the hill tribes of Paeonia and decisively beats them. He established his authority inland as far as Lake Ohrid.", "The Romans defeat the Volsci, annex most of their territory, and settle it with Roman colonists. The Romans also force the Latin League to renew its close alliance with Rome, an alliance which was weakened by Rome\u2019s defeat at the hands of the Gauls in 390 BC."], "birth": ["Seleucus I Nicator, Macedonian officer of Alexander the Great and founder of the Seleucid dynasty of Egypt (d. 281 BC)"]}, "-357": {"death": [], "event": ["Rhodes falls to the Persian satrap Mausolus of Halicarnassus.", "The Athenian general and mercenary commander, Chares and the Euboean mercenary Charidemus regain the Thracian Chersonese for Athens from the Thracian king Cersobleptes. Charidemus receives from Athens a golden crown for his part in the victory.", "The Macedonian general, Parmenio, wins a great victory over the Illyrians. King Philip II of Macedon, having disposed of an Illyrian threat, occupies the Athenian city of Amphipolis (which commands the gold mines of Mount Pangaion). Philip II now has control of the strategic city which secures the eastern frontier of Macedonia and gives him access into Thrace.", "Philip II of Macedon marries Olympias, the Molossian princess of Epirus thus helping to stabilize Macedonia's western frontier.", "The brother-in-law of Dionysius I, Dion, exiled from Syracuse in 366 BC by Dionysius II, assembles a force of 1,500 mercenaries at Zacynthus and sails to Sicily. Dion wrests power from the weak Dionysius II, who is exiled and flees to Locri."], "birth": []}, "-356": {"death": ["Chabrias, Athenian general"], "event": ["Having blamed the defeats by Philip II in Thessaly and Chalcidice on his colleagues, Chares is left as sole Athenian commander. Chares is in need of money for his war effort, but frowns upon asking it from the Athenians so, partly compelled by his mercenaries, he enters the service of the insurgent Persian satrap Artabazus of Phrygia who rewards Chares very generously.", "Artabazus of Phrygia is also supported by the Thebans, who send him 5,000 men under their general Pammenes. With the assistance of these and other allies, Artabazus defeats his Persian enemies in two great battles.", "The Persian King Artaxerxes III orders all the satraps (governors) of his empire to dismiss their mercenaries. The Athenians, who have originally approved their mercenaries' collaboration with Artabazus of Phrygia, order them to leave due to their fear of Persian support for the revolting states of Chios, Rhodes, and Cos. Thebes follows suit and withdraws its mercenaries.", "With King Artaxerxes III succeeding in depriving Artabazus of his Athenian and Theban allies, Artabazus is defeated by the Persian King's general, Autophradates.", "Philip II of Macedon secretly offers the city of Amphipolis back to the Athenians in exchange for the valuable port of Pydna. Despite the Athenians being willing to comply, both Pydna and Potidaea are conquered by the Macedonians (along with other Athenian strongholds in Thessaly and Chalcidice) despite being defended by Athenian forces led by general and mercenary commander, Chares, as well as generals Iphicrates and Timotheus.", "With Pydna and Potidaea occupied, Philip II decides to keep Amphipolis anyway. He also takes the city of Crenides from the Odrysae and renames it Philippi.", "The Phocians capture and sack Delphi in whose territory the famous temple and oracle stand. A sacred war is declared against them by the other members of the Great Amphictyonic League. The Phocians, led by two capable generals, Philomelus and Onomarchus, use Delphi's riches to hire a mercenary army to carry the war into Boeotia and Thessaly.", "The Social War or the \"War of the Allies\" begins between the Second Athenian Empire, led by Athens, and its revolting allies of Chios, Rhodes, and Kos as well as the independent state Byzantium. Mausolus, the tyrant of Caria, instigates the rebellion against the Athenian control of these states. The revolting allies ravage the islands of Lemnos and Imbros which are loyal to Athens.", "The Athenian generals Chares and Chabrias are given command of the Athenian fleet with the aim of defeating the rebellious cities. However, Chabrias' fleet is defeated and he is killed in its attack on the island of Chios, off the coast of Ionia.", "Chares is given complete command of the Athenian fleet and withdraws to the Hellespont to move against Byzantium. The generals Timotheus, Iphicrates and his son Menestheus are sent to help him when the enemy fleet is sighted on the Hellespont. Timotheus and Iphicrates refuse to engage due to a severe gale, but Chares does engage and lose many of his ships. Timotheus and Iphicrates are accused by Chares and put on trial, however only Timotheus is condemned to pay a fine.", "A plebian is chosen for the first time as a dictator in Rome.", "With his reforms initiated in this year, the Chinese prime minister Shang Yang starts to transform the once marginal and frontier State of Qin to become the most dominant military force amongst the Warring States of China by the 3rd century BC.", "July \u2013 The Temple of Artemis at Ephesus is burned down by a madman named Herostratus, destroying one of the Seven Wonders of the World. The great temple was built by Croesus, king of Lydia, in about 550 BC and was famous not only for its great size (110 metres by 55 metres), but also for the magnificent works of art that adorned it."], "birth": ["July \u2013 Alexander the Great, later King of Macedonia (d. 323 BC)", "Hephaestion, Macedonian general, soldier, aristocrat and companion of Alexander the Great (d. 324 BC)"]}, "-355": {"death": ["Xenophon, Greek historian, soldier, mercenary and an admirer of Socrates (b. c. 431 BC)", "Eudoxus of Cnidus, Greek astronomer and mathematician (b. c. 408 BC)", "King Hui of Liang"], "event": ["King Artaxerxes III of Persia forces Athens to conclude a peace which requires the city to leave Asia Minor and to acknowledge the independence of its rebellious allies.", "King Archidamus III of Sparta supports the Phocians against Thebes in the \"Sacred War\".", "Chares' war party in Athens is replaced by one under Eubulus which favours peace. Eubulus restores the economic position of Athens without increasing the burden of taxation and improves the Athenian fleet while its docks and fortifications are repaired."], "birth": []}, "-354": {"death": ["Dion, tyrant of Syracuse (assassinated) (b. c. 408 BC)", "Timotheus, Athenian statesman and general", "Xenophon, Greek historian, soldier, mercenary and an admirer of Socrates (b. c. 427 BC)"], "event": ["Reflecting the growing level of discontent with his tyrannical conduct, Dion is assassinated by Callippus, an Athenian who has accompanied him on his expedition to take over as tyrant of Syracuse. Dionysius II remains in exile in Italy.", "Athens recognises the independence of Chios, Kos and Rhodes and makes peace with Mausolus of Caria.", "The Phocians suffer a defeat in the Sacred War against Athens.", "Philip II of Macedon takes and destroys Methone, a town which has belonged to Athens. During the siege of Methone, Philip loses an eye.", "Rome allies itself with the Samnites and they agree on a mutual defence pact against the Gauls. Rome also defeats the Etruscans of the city of Caere.", "The State of Qi is victorious over the State of Wei in the Battle of Guiling, a conflict which involves the military strategy of Sun Bin.", "The Mausoleum at Halicarnassus in Caria, the tomb of King Mausolus and one of the Seven Wonders of the World, is built."], "birth": []}, "-353": {"death": ["Clearchus of Heraclea, tyrant of Heraclea Pontica (assassinated) (b. c. 401 BC)", "Iphicrates, Athenian general (b. c. 418 BC)", "Mausolus, King and Persian satrap of Caria"], "event": ["Mausolus, King and Persian satrap of Caria, dies and is succeeded in 352 BC by Artemisia, his sister and wife.", "The Phocians threaten Thessaly to their north. Philip II of Macedon sees his opportunity to penetrate south.", "Clearchus, the tyrant of Heraclea, a Greek city on the Black Sea, is murdered by some of the city's citizens led by Chion after a reign of twelve years. Most of the conspirators are killed by the tyrant's body-guards upon the spot, while others are captured and put to death. Within a short time, the city falls under the rule of the new tyrant Satyrus, Clearchus' brother."], "birth": []}, "-352": {"death": [], "event": ["After two initial efforts, Philip II of Macedon drives the Phocians south after a major victory over them in the Battle of Crocus Field. Athens and Sparta come to the assistance of the Phocians and Philip is checked at Thermopylae. Philip does not attempt to advance into central Greece with the Athenians occupying this pass. With this victory, Philip accrues great glory as the righteous avenger of Apollo, since the Phocian general Onomarchos has plundered the sacred treasury of Delphi to pay his mercenaries. Onomarchos' body is crucified, and the prisoners are drowned as ritual demanded for temple-robbers.", "Philip then moves against Thrace. He makes a successful expedition into Thrace, gaining a firm ascendancy in the country, and brings away a son of Cersobleptes, the King of Thrace, as a hostage. Philip II's Thessalian victory earns him election as president (archon) of the Thessalian League."], "birth": []}, "-351": {"death": [], "event": ["Encouraged by a failed effort at invasion of Egypt by King Artaxerxes III, Phoenicia and Cyprus revolt against Persia.", "Demosthenes tries to get the Athenians to cease depending on paid mercenaries and return to the old concept of a citizen army. He also delivers his first Philippic, warning Athenians of the folly of believing that Philip's ill health will save Athens from the Macedonians. In response, Athens' citizens votes for increased armaments.", "The Etruscans are badly defeated by the Romans and abandon their attacks on the city and sue for peace.", "First use of the heavy throwing spear, the pilum, (according to Livy) in battle against the Gauls.", "The first Roman plebeian is elected to the office of censor."], "birth": []}, "-350": {"death": ["Tollund Man, human sacrifice victim on the Jutland peninsula in Denmark, possibly the earliest known evidence for worship of the Norse god Odin (approximate date)", "Artemisia, Queen of Caria and sister and wife of King Mausolus of Caria"], "event": ["Sidon, the centre of the revolt against Persia, seeks help from its sister city of Tyre and from Egypt but gets very little.", "Idrieus, the second son of Hecatomnus, succeeds to the throne of Caria on the death of Artemisia II, the widow of his elder brother Mausolus. Shortly after his accession, at the request of the Persian king, Artaxerxes III, Idrieus equips a fleet of 40 triremes and assembles an army of 8,000 mercenary troops and despatches them against Cyprus, under the command of the Athenian general Phocion.", "Alexander I becomes king of Epirus after his brother-in-law Philip II of Macedon dethrones Alexander's cousin Arymbas.", "Philip II has Abdera in Thrace sacked.", "The Gauls, once more threatening Rome, are decisively beaten by an army comprising Rome and its allies.", "The Maya civilization in Mesoamerica begins (approximate date).", "Aristotle argues for a spherical Earth using lunar eclipses and other observations. Also he discusses logical reasoning in Organon.", "Plato proposes a geocentric model of the universe with the stars rotating on a fixed celestial sphere.", "Praxiteles makes the Aphrodite of Knidos (approximate date). A composite of two similar Roman copies after the original marble is now kept at Musei Vaticani, Museo Pio Clementino, Gabinetto delle Maschere in Rome.", "The building of the Mausoleum in Halikarnassos (modern Bodrum in Turkey) is completed (approximate date). It is the grave of the Persian satrap and Carian ruler Mausolos and is built under the direction of his wife Artemisia. The mausoleum, which is considered to be one of the Seven Wonders of the Ancient World, is today partly preserved at the British Museum in London.", "The Corinthian capital is made in the tholos at Epidaurus. It is now preserved at the Archaeological Museum in Epidaurus, Greece (approximate date)."], "birth": ["Dicaearchus, Greek philosopher, cartographer, geographer, mathematician and polygraph (d. c. 285 BC)", "Cassander, king of Macedonia and founder of Antipatrid dynasty (approximate date) (d. c. 297 BC)", "Shen Dao, Chinese philosopher known for his blend of Legalism and Taoism (approximate date) (d. c. 275 BC)"]}, "-349": {"death": [], "event": ["Sidon is besieged by Persian forces.", "After recovering from illness, Philip II of Macedon turns his attention to the remaining Athenian controlled cities in Macedonia and to the city of Olynthus, in particular. The Athenians organise to send help."], "birth": []}, "-348": {"death": [], "event": ["After being besieged by the Persian forces of King Artaxerxes III, Sidon is taken and its population is punished with great cruelty.", "The Athenian help to its cities in Macedonia is diverted by a revolt in Euboea which Philip II of Macedon has fomented. He conquers the city of Olynthus in the Chalcidice and he annexes Chalcidice to Macedonia.", "The city of Eretria on the island of Euboea successfully rebels against the rule of Athens and Euboea is declared independent. The Athenian statesman and general, Phocion's tactical skills save an Athenian force sent to fight the supporters of Philip II on Euboea.", "Rome and Carthage make a trade agreement under which Carthage will not attack those Latin states which are faithful to Rome. This agreement demonstrates that Rome is now the dominant power in the Latin League."], "birth": []}, "-347": {"death": ["Plato, Greek philosopher and founder of the Academy in Athens (b. c. 427 BC)", "Eudoxus of Cnidus, Greek philosopher and astronomer who has expanded on Plato's ideas (or 355 BC) (b. 410 BC or 408 BC)"], "event": ["In the wake of the Macedonian victory at Olynthus, Athens seeks to make peace with Macedonia. Because his financial policy is based on the assumption that Athens should not be involved in major wars, the Athenian leader, Eubulus, works for peace with Philip II of Macedon. Demosthenes is among those who support a compromise.", "An Athenian delegation, comprising Demosthenes, Aeschines and Philocrates, is officially sent to Pella to negotiate a peace treaty with Philip II. During the negotiations, Aeschines seeks to reconcile the Athenians to Macedonia's expansion into Greece.", "Coinage is introduced into Rome for the first time.", "Plato dies and his nephew Speusippus is named as head of the Academy.", "Aristotle leaves Athens due to the anti-Macedonian feeling that arises in Athens after Philip II of Macedon has sacked the Greek city-state of Olynthus in 348 BC. With him goes another Academy member of note, Xenocrates of Chalcedon. They establish a new academy on the Asia Minor side of the Aegean Sea at the newly built town of Assus."], "birth": []}, "-346": {"death": [], "event": ["The Peace of Philocrates is signed between Macedonia and Athens. The document agrees to a return to the status quo, but Philip II of Macedon keeps the right to punish the Phocians for starting the Sacred War.", "The Athenian politicians, Demosthenes and Timarchus, prepare to prosecute Aeschines for treason after he has sought to reconcile the Athenians to Macedonia's expansion into Greece. Eubulus loses his influence on Athenian affairs.", "Demosthenes, though condemning the terms of the Peace of Philocrates, argues that it has to be honoured.", "Following the conclusion of the Peace of Philocrates, Philip II's army moves through the pass of Thermopylae and subdues Phocis. Athens makes no move to support the Phocians.", "Dionysius II is restored to power in Syracuse."], "birth": []}, "-345": {"death": ["Nicochares, Athenian poet of the Old Comedy"], "event": ["Supported by Thebes and Thessaly, Macedonia takes over Phocis' votes in the Amphictyonic League, a Greek religious organisation formed to support the greater temples of Apollo and Demeter. Despite some reluctance on the part of the Athenian leaders, Athens finally accepts Philip II's entry into the Council of the League. The Athenian statesman, Demosthenes, is among those who recommend this stance in his oration On the Peace."], "birth": []}, "-344": {"death": ["Idrieus, king of Caria"], "event": ["The king of Caria, Idrieus, dies, leaving the Persian satrapy, by his will, to his sister Ada, to whom he was married.", "The Athenian statesman, Demosthenes, travels to Peloponnesus, in order to detach as many cities as possible from Macedon's influence, but his efforts are generally unsuccessful. Most of the Peloponnesians see Philip II as the guarantor of their freedom, so they send a joint embassy to Athens to express their grievances against Demosthenes' activities. In response to these complaints, Demosthenes delivers the Second Philippic, which is a vehement attack against Philip II.", "The aristocracy of Syracuse appeal to their mother city of Corinth against their tyrant Dionysius II. The Corinthian general Timoleon is chosen to lead a liberation force to Sicily. Landing at Tauromenium (Taormina) in the summer, Timoleon faces two armies, one under Dionysius and the other under Hicetas (tyrant of nearby Leontini), who has also called in Carthaginian forces. By shrewd tactics Timoleon defeats his enemies and occupies Syracuse.", "Dionysius II goes into exile once more after the successful invasion by Timoleon of Corinth.", "The Greek philosopher and scientist, Aristotle, travels from Assus to Lesbos to study natural history, especially marine biology."], "birth": []}, "-343": {"death": ["Dionysius II, tyrant of Syracuse (b. c. 397 BC)"], "event": ["The King of Persia, Artaxerxes III, personally leads the Persian forces invading Egypt. The Persians are keen to access Egypt's gold and corn supplies. The town of Pelusium in the Nile Delta puts up resistance, but Pharaoh Nectanebo II is forced to retreat to Memphis.[1] As the situation deteriorates, Nectanebo II leaves for exile in Nubia. His departure marks the end of the 30th Dynasty, the last native house to rule Egypt.", "With Nectanebo II's flight, all organised resistance to the Persians collapses, and Egypt once again is reduced to a satrapy of the Persian Empire. A Persian satrap is put in place in Egypt. The walls of the country's cities are destroyed and its temples are plundered. Artaxerxes and his commander-in-chief, General Bagoas, leave Egypt loaded with treasure.", "The Athenian statesman Demosthenes has Aeschines indicted for treason. However, Aeschines drags up the inappropriate past of one of Demosthenes' associates, Timarchus and is acquitted by a narrow margin.", "King Philip II of Macedon again marches against Cersobleptes, King of Thrace, and defeats him in several battles, and reduces him to the condition of being a tributary.", "Phalaikos unsuccessfully lays siege to Kydonia on the island of Crete.[2]", "The native Italian tribes, the Lucanians and Bruttians, press down upon the Greek colonies of Magna Graecia, including Tarentum. Responding to calls for help from these former Greek colonies, King Archidamus III of Sparta sets sail with a band of mercenaries for Italy.", "After his surrender to the Corinthian general Timoleon, who takes over as ruler of Syracuse, the former tyrant, Dionysius II, is allowed to retire to Corinth to live in exile, although he dies within the year. The Syracusan constitution is changed by Timoleon with the new constitution designed to have safeguards against tyranny. Timoleon invites new settlers from Greece to come to Sicily.", "The most powerful group of the native tribes in highland Italy, the confederated Samnites, swarm down into Campania. The citizens of the city of Capua appeal to Rome for help in settling their internal quarrels and to save their city from destruction from the Samnites. The Romans respond, which begins the First Samnite War."], "birth": ["Philetaerus, founder of the Attalid dynasty of Pergamum in Anatolia (approximate date) (d. 263 BC)"]}, "-342": {"death": [], "event": ["The Greek philosopher, Aristotle, is invited by Philip II to his capital at Pella to tutor his son, Alexander. As the leading intellectual figure in Greece, Aristotle is commissioned to prepare Alexander for his future role as a military leader.", "Philip begins a series of campaigns in Thrace with the aim of annexing it to be a province of Macedonia. When the Macedonian army approaches Thracian Chersonese (the Gallipoli Peninsula), an Athenian general named Diopeithes ravages this district of Thrace, thus inciting Philip's rage for operating too near one of his towns in the Chersonese. Philip demands his recall. In response, the Athenian Assembly is convened. Demosthenes convinces the Athenians not to recall Diopeithes.", "The Corinthian general Timoleon spreads his rule over Sicily, removing a number of other tyrants and preparing Sicily for another threatened Carthaginian invasion.", "The Battle of Mount Gaurus is fought between the Romans and the Samnites. The battle is a success for the Romans, who, it is said, are led by Marcus Valerius Corvus. Fought at the foot of Mount Gaurus, near Cumae, it is the most notable engagement of the First Samnite War.", "In the course of the Warring States Period, the army of the state of Qi defeats the army of the state of Wei in the Battle of Maling. This battle involves the military strategy of the general Sun Bin (descendent of Sun Tzu), and is the first battle in recorded history to give a reliable account of the handheld crossbow with trigger mechanism."], "birth": ["Menander, Greek playwright (d. 291 BC)"]}, "-341": {"death": [], "event": ["Philip II of Macedon completes his annexation of Thrace. This is regarded by Athens as a further threat to the city's safety.", "Demosthenes delivers his Third Philippic. In it, he demands resolute action against Philip II. Demosthenes now dominates Athenian politics and is able to considerably weaken the pro-Macedonian faction led by Aeschines. As a result, Demosthenes becomes controller of the Athenian navy.", "A grand alliance is organised by Demosthenes against Philip II, which includes Byzantium and former enemies of Athens, such as Thebes. These developments worry Philip and increase his anger towards Demosthenes. The Athenian Assembly, however, lays aside Philip's grievances against Demosthenes' conduct and denounce the Peace of Philocrates which has been signed by both sides in 346 BC, an action equivalent to an official declaration of war by Athens against Macedonia.", "The First Samnite War ends with Rome triumphant and the Samnites willing to make peace. The war is ended with a hasty peace agreement, owing to a revolt by Rome's Latin allies, who resent their dependence on the dominant city. Despite its brevity, the First Samnite War results in the major acquisition by Rome of the rich land of Campania with its capital of Capua."], "birth": ["Epicurus, Greek philosopher, founder of Epicureanism (d. 270 BC)"]}, "-340": {"death": ["Lais of Hyccara, Greek hetaera (approximate date)"], "event": ["Rhodes falls to Persian forces.", "Pixodarus, the youngest of the three sons of King Hecatomnus of Caria, gains possession of the satrapy of Caria by expelling his sister Ada, the widow and successor of her brother Idrieus.", "When King Philip II of Macedon attacks Perinthus and Byzantium, King Artaxerxes III of Persia sends support to those cities.", "Philip II fails in his siege of Byzantium and is forced to respond to attacks by the Scythians near the mouth of the Danube. His son, Alexander is regent while his father fights against Byzantium and the Scythians.", "The Athenians give Demosthenes a public vote of thanks after Philip's unsuccessful siege of Byzantium.", "Hicetas, the tyrant of Leontini, again persuades Carthage to send a large army to Sicily, which lands at Lilybaeum. Timoleon of Syracuse meets this large Carthaginian army in the Battle of the Crimissus in the west of Sicily and achieves a brilliant victory against superior odds. Despite this victory, the Carthaginians continue to occupy the western half of Sicily, with a treaty being concluded that confines the Carthaginians to the area west of the Halycus (Platani) River.", "An embassy is sent by the Latin peoples to the Roman Senate asking for the formation of a single republic between Rome and Latium, in which both parties would be considered to be equal. As Rome considers that it is the leader of the Latin League, it refuses to treat the Latin people as being equal politically or have Latin people in the Roman Senate. With Rome's refusal of the proposal, the Latin War begins. The Latins fight with the Campanians, while Rome joins the Samnites to attack the Latins. Only the Laurentes in Latium and the equites of Campania remain with the Romans, who, for their part, find support among the Paeligni.", "The Roman-Samnite army under consuls Decius Mus and Titus Manlius Torquatus attack and defeat the Latins and Campanians near Mount Vesuvius in the Battle of Vesuvius.", "The Romans succeed in detaching the Campanians from their alliance with the Latins (through their fear of the Samnites) and induce them to make a separate peace. Three Campanian cities, including Capua and Cumae, are granted Roman citizenship and thus become part of the Roman state. The Roman state now extends to the Bay of Naples."], "birth": ["Qu Yuan, Chinese poet (approximate date) (d. 278 BC)"]}, "-339": {"death": ["Speusippus, head of Plato's Academy (b. 407 BC)", "Ateas, King of the Scythians (b. c. 429 BC)"], "event": ["Philip II of Macedon decides to attack the Scythians, using as an excuse their reluctance to allow Philip to dedicate a statue of Heracles at the Danube estuary. The two armies clash on the plains of modern-day Dobruja. The ninety-year-old King of the Scythians, Ateas, is killed during the battle and his army is routed.", "During a meeting of the Amphictyonic Council, Philip accuses the citizens of the town of Amfissa, in Locris, of intruding on consecrated ground. The Amphictyonic Congress, with the initial support of the Athenian representative, Aeschines, decides to inflict a harsh punishment upon the Locrians. After the failure of a first military excursion against the Locrians, the summer session of the Amphictyonic Council gives command of the league's forces to Philip and asks him to lead a second excursion. Philip acts at once, and his forces pass through Thermopylae, enter Amfissa and defeat the Locrians who are led by Chares, the Athenian general and mercenary commander.", "Xenocrates is elected as head of the Greek Academy replacing Speusippus.", "The Roman consul Titus Manlius Imperiosus Torquatus defeats the Latins in the Battle of Trifanum."], "birth": []}, "-338": {"death": ["Artaxerxes III, king of Persia (murdered) (b. c. 425 BC)", "Archidamus III, king of Sparta (killed in battle)", "Isocrates, Athenian orator and rhetorician (b. 436 BC)", "Hicetas, Greek philosopher (approximate date) (b. c. 400 BC)", "Shang Yang, Chinese statesman of Qin (executed)", "Xiao of Qin, Duke of Qin, China (b. 381 BC)"], "event": ["The Persian general and vizier, the eunuch Bagoas, falls out of favour with King Artaxerxes III. Bagoas seeks to remain in office by replacing Artaxerxes with his youngest son Arses, whom he thinks will be easier to control. So Bagoas murders Artaxerxes III and all his sons, other than Arses, who is then placed on the throne by Bagoas. Artaxerxes IV Arses is little more than a puppet-king while Bagoas acts as the power behind the throne.", "After his significant victory over the Locrians, Philip II of Macedon swiftly enters Phocis. He then turns south-east down the Cephissus valley, seizes Elateia and restores the fortifications of the city.", "Athens arranges an alliance with Euboea, Megara, Achaea, Corinth, Acarnania and some other states in the Peloponnesus. However, the most desirable ally for Athens is Thebes. Therefore, the Athenian leader, Demosthenes, goes to the Boeotian city and secures an alliance with Thebes despite the efforts of a Macedonian deputation to persuade Thebes to join with Macedonia. In return, Athens agrees to Thebes controlling Boeotia, Thebes being in command solely on land and jointly at sea, and Athens paying two thirds of the campaign's cost.", "August 2 \u2013 Philip II of Macedon defeats the Athenians and Thebans in the Battle of Chaeronea in western Boeotia. His son, Alexander, commands the left wing of the Macedonian army during the battle. In victory, Philip II is harsh on Thebes, but merciful on Athens, thanks to the efforts of the Athenian orator and diplomat, Demades, who helps negotiate a peace agreement between Macedonia and Athens.", "Philip II advances into Peloponnesus. He defeats Thessaly, subdues Sparta and summons a Pan-Hellenic Congress at Corinth. This results in the establishment of Macedonian hegemony over central Greece (including Athens).", "Athenian statesman and orator, Lycurgus, is given control of the state's finances and goes about doubling the annual public revenues.", "King Archidamus III of Sparta, after five years of campaigning in southern Italy, fails to achieve any decisive results and while leading a mercenary army to help Tarentum against the Lucanians, he is killed with most of his troops at Manduria in Calabria.", "King Archidamus III is succeeded as the Eurypontid King of Sparta by his son, Agis III.", "Carthage makes another effort to conquer all of Sicily. The Carthaginians dispatch some mercenaries to extend the conflict between Timoleon and the Sicilian tyrants. But this effort ends in the defeat of Hicetas, the tyrant of Leontini, who is taken prisoner and put to death. By a treaty between Syracuse and Carthage, the dominion of Carthage in Sicily is confined to the lands west of the Halycus (Platani) River.", "With peace finally achieved with Carthage, Timoleon of Syracuse is able to depose two more tyrants in Sicily and then retires into private life.", "The Latin War ends with the Latin League being dissolved and the individual Latin cities having to accept Rome's terms. Many of the cities are incorporated into the Roman state. In making peace with the cities of the defeated Latin League, Rome offers liberal terms. The men of many of these cities are granted citizenship and, as a result, Rome gains friends rather than enemies.", "With the fall of their chief city, Antium, to the Romans, the Volsci finally abandon their resistance against the Romans and accept an alliance with Rome."], "birth": []}, "-337": {"death": ["Timoleon, Greek statesman and general (b. c. 411 BC)", "Shen Pu-hai, Chinese bureaucrat, chief minister of Han"], "event": ["At a Pan-Hellenic Conference in Corinth, Philip II of Macedon announces the formation of the League of Corinth to liberate the Greek cities of Asia Minor from Persian rule, ostensibly because the Persian King, Arses, refuses to make reparations to Philip for Artaxerxes III's aid to the city of Perinthus when it was resisting Philip. All the Greek cities (except Sparta) and the Greek islands swear their support to the league and to recognise Philip as president of the League. Philip establishes a council of representatives from all the Greek states, which is empowered to deliberate and decide on the actions to be taken. However, the real power lies with Philip who is declared commander of the League's army.", "Olympias is put aside by her husband Philip II, following Philip's marriage to a girl named Cleopatra (who is renamed Eurydice). Their son, Alexander, is effectively disowned by Philip's actions. Philip II has Ptolemy, along with other companions of his son, exiled.", "A plebeian is chosen to be praetor of Rome for the first time."], "birth": ["Demetrius I Poliorcetes (\"Besieger\"), Antigonid dynasty king of Macedon (d. 283 BC)"]}, "-336": {"death": ["Philip II, King of Macedonia (b. 382 BC)", "Arses, King of Persia", "Bagoas, Vizier of Persia", "Attalus, Macedonian general (b. c. 390 BC)", "Pausanias of Orestis, personal bodyguard of Philip II of Macedon", "Eurydice, 5th wife of Philip II, queen of Macedonia", "Amyntas IV, usurper king of Macedon"], "event": ["The young king of Persia, Arses, objects to being controlled by Bagoas and attempts to poison him. Instead, Arses and all his children are killed by Bagoas.", "Bagoas then seeks to install a new monarch who will be easier to control. He chooses Codomannus, a distant relative of the royal house, who takes the name Darius III. When Darius tries to assert his independence from Bagoas' control, Bagoas attempts to poison him, but the king is warned and forces Bagoas to drink the poison himself.", "Following Philip II of Macedon's marriage to Eurydice, Alexander and his mother, Olympias, flee to Epirus, with Alexander later moving to Illyria. However, shortly afterward, father and son are reconciled and Alexander returns; but his position as heir is tenuous.", "Macedonian troops, commanded by Parmenion, trusted lieutenant of Philip II, arrive in Asia Minor, but are driven back by Persian forces under the command of the Greek mercenary Memnon of Rhodes.", "At a grand celebration of his daughter Cleopatra's marriage to Alexander I of Epirus (brother of Olympias), Philip II is assassinated at Aegae by Pausanias of Orestis, a young Macedonian noble with a bitter grievance against the young queen's uncle Attalus and against Philip for denying him justice. Pausanias is killed on the spot.", "Philip II of Macedon is succeeded by his son Alexander III. One of the leading generals in Macedonia at the death of Philip II, Antipater, helps to secure the succession to the Macedonian throne for Alexander.", "The Macedonian general Parmenion declares for Alexander III and assists in the murdering of the princes of the Lynkestis region, who are alleged to be behind Philip's murder, along with other possible rivals and members of factions opposed to Alexander. Olympias, Alexander's mother, has Philip's last wife Eurydice, her infant daughter and her influential uncle, Attalus, killed.", "Alexander immediately has Amyntas IV, son of King Perdiccas III and cousin of Alexander, executed.", "Alexander puts down a rebellion in Macedonia and crushes the rebellious Illyrians. He then appears at the gates of Thebes and receives the city's submission. After that he advances to the Corinthian isthmus and is elected by the assembled Greeks as their commander against Persia.", "Conscription is introduced in Athens. Young men are required to perform duties which are part military and part civic.", "Aeschines brings a suit against Ctesiphon for illegally proposing the award of a crown to the Athenian leader Demosthenes in recognition of his services to Athens."], "birth": []}, "-335": {"death": ["Hicetas of Syracuse, Greek mathematician and philosopher (b. c. 400 BC)", "Eubulus, Athenian statesman (b. c. 405 BC)"], "event": ["Returning to Macedonia by way of Delphi (where the Pythian priestess acclaims him \"invincible\"), King Alexander III of Macedonia advances into Thrace in order to secure the Danube as the northern boundary of the Macedonian kingdom. After forcing the Shipka Pass and crushing the Triballi, he crosses the Danube to disperse the Getae. Turning west, he then defeats and shatters a coalition of Illyrians who are invading Macedonia.", "A rumour that Alexander has been killed by the Illyrians leads the Thebans and Athenians to take up arms again. Alexander defeats the Greeks and razes Thebes. In Thebes, 6,000 people are killed and all survivors are sold into slavery.", "After conquering Thebes, Alexander demands the surrender of the mercenary commanders, Chares and Charidemus, among others. Chares escapes to the Troad while Charidemus is banished and flees to Persia.", "The admiration of Alexander for the Athenian orator and diplomat, Demades, leads the conqueror to treat Athens leniently despite its involvement in the rebellion. A special Athenian embassy led by Phocion, an opponent of the anti-Macedonian faction, is able to persuade Alexander to give up his demand for the exile of the leaders of the anti-Macedonian party, particularly Demosthenes.", "Aristotle returns to Athens from Macedon and opens a peripatetic school in an old gymnasium called the Lyceum. It contains a museum of natural history, zoological gardens and a library.", "Marcus Valerius Corvus is elected consul of the Roman Republic for the fourth time.", "Cales (modern Calvi), a city in Campania, is taken by the Romans and a Roman colony is established there.", "The sculptor Praxiteles ends his active career in Athens (approximate date; possibly later)."], "birth": []}, "-334": {"death": ["Pixodarus, King of Caria"], "event": ["The king of Caria, Pixodarus, dies and is succeeded by his son-in-law, Orontobates.", "As the Persian satraps have gathered for a war council at Zeleia, Memnon argues that it is preferable for the Persians to avoid a pitched battle and adopt a scorched earth tactic. Arsites, the satrap of Hellespontine Phrygia, will not allow his land to be burned and agrees with other satraps to reject this cautious advice.", "King Alexander III of Macedonia crosses the Dardanelles, leaving Antipater, who has already faithfully served his father, Philip II, as his deputy in Greece with over 13,000 men. Alexander himself commands about 30,000 foot soldiers and over 5,000 cavalry, of whom nearly 14,000 are Macedonians and about 7,000 are allies sent by the Greek League.", "May \u2013 Alexander wins a major victory against the Persians commanded by the Greek mercenary Memnon of Rhodes, in the Battle of the Granicus near the Sea of Marmara. A large number of King Darius III's Greek mercenaries are massacred, but 2,000 survivors are sent back to Macedonia in chains.", "Alexander accepts the surrender of the Persian provincial capital of Sardis (and its treasury) and proceeds down the Ionian coast.", "At Halicarnassus, Alexander successfully undertakes the first of many sieges, eventually forcing his opponents, the mercenary captain Memnon of Rhodes and the Persian satrap of Caria, Orontobates, to withdraw by sea. Alexander leaves Caria in the hands of Ada, who was the ruler of Caria before being deposed by her brother-in-law, Pixodarus.", "Alexander's victory exposes western Asia Minor to the Macedonians, and most of the cities in the region hasten to open their gates. The Ionian city of Miletus defies Alexander and he has to subdue it through a siege.", "Alexander of Epirus, at the request of colony of Taras (Tarentum) crosses over into Italy, to aid them against the Lucanians and Bruttii. He wins victories over the Italian Samnite tribes.", "The rulers of Wei and Qi agree to recognize each other as kings, formalizing the independence of the Warring States and the powerlessness of the Zhou Dynasty."], "birth": ["Zeno of Citium, Greek philosopher and the father of Stoicism"]}, "-333": {"death": ["Memnon of Rhodes, Greek mercenary leader (b. 380 BC)", "Charidemus, Greek mercenary leader"], "event": ["King Alexander of Macedonia conquers western Asia Minor, subduing the hill tribes of Lycia and Pisidia.", "King Darius III of Persia executes Charidemus, a Greek mercenary leader living in exile in Persia, for criticising preparations taken for the Battle of Issus.", "Alexander has a great victory over the Persians in the Battle of the Issus River in Cilicia, but the Persian Emperor Darius III escapes. Darius leaves behind his wife, his two daughters, his mother Sisygambis, and much of his personal treasure. Darius' family is captured by Alexander and well treated.", "Alexander makes one of his officers, Nearchus, satrap of the newly conquered Lycia and Pamphylia in Anatolia and he appoints his general, Antigonus, satrap of Phrygia.", "From Issus, Alexander marches south into Syria and Phoenicia, his object being to isolate the Persian fleet from its bases and so to destroy it as an effective fighting force. The Phoenician cities of Marathus and Aradus do not resist Alexander's armies. Parmenion is sent ahead to try to secure Damascus and its rich booty, including Darius' war chest.", "After taking Byblos and Sidon, Alexander lays siege to Tyre.", "In reply to a letter from Darius offering peace, Alexander demands Darius' unconditional surrender."], "birth": []}, "-332": {"death": [], "event": ["The Persian King Darius III twice sends Alexander letters of friendship. The second time he offers a large ransom for his family, the ceding of all of the Persian Empire west of the Euphrates River, and the hand of his daughter in return for an alliance. Alexander rejects both letters and marches into Mesopotamia.", "Alexander of Macedonia occupies Damascus and, after a siege lasting seven months, destroys Tyre during which there is great carnage and the sale of the women and children into slavery.", "Leaving Parmenion in Syria, Alexander advances south without opposition until he reaches Gaza where bitter resistance halts him for two months, and he sustains a serious shoulder wound during a sortie.", "Alexander conquers Egypt from the Persians. The Egyptians welcome him as their deliverer, and the Persian satrap Mazaces wisely surrenders. Alexander's conquest of Egypt completes his control of the whole eastern Mediterranean coast.", "Alexander spends the winter organising the administration of Egypt. He employs Egyptian governors, while keeping the army under a separate Macedonian command.", "Alexander founds the city of Alexandria near the western arm of the Nile on a site between the sea and Lake Mareotis, protected by the island of Pharos, and has the city laid out by the Rhodian architect Deinocrates.", "Chandragupta Maurya captures Magadha: Chandragupta, with the help Chanakya (Kautilya), who is also known as the Indian Machiavelli, destroyed the Nanda rulers of Magadha and established the Mauryan empire. It is said that Chanakya met Chandragupta in the Vindhya forest, after being insulted by the Nanda king.", "After a victory over the Samnites and Lucanians near Paestum, Alexander of Epirus makes a treaty with the Romans."], "birth": []}, "-331": {"death": ["Alexander I of Epirus, Aeacid dynasty king of Epirus (b. c. 370 BC)", "Vahe, legendary king of Armenia and last of the Hyke dynasty"], "event": ["Alexander departs from Egypt and leads his forces towards Phoenicia. He leaves Cleomenes of Naucratis as the ruling nomarch to control Egypt.", "October 1 \u2013 Alexander of Macedonia is victorious in the Battle of Gaugamela (near ancient Ninevah) over the Persian King Darius III. Darius turns his chariot and flees, although his subordinates fight on. Alexander pursues the defeated Persian forces to Arbela, but Darius escapes with his Bactrian cavalry and Greek mercenaries into Media.", "Alexander encounters for the first time war elephants, he captures 15 Persian elephants after the battle in Daurius' camp.", "Alexander becomes the master of the Persian Empire, ending the Achaemenid dynasty. Babylon and Susa open their gates to him. In the capital, Susa, Alexander gains access to huge treasures amounting to 50,000 gold talents.", "While Alexander is fighting in Asia, Agis III of Sparta, profiting from the Macedonian king's absence from Greece, leads some of the Greek cities in a revolt. With Persian money and 8,000 Greek mercenaries, he holds Crete against Macedonian forces. In the Peloponnesus he routes a force under the Macedonian general Coragus and, although Athens stays neutral, he is joined by Elis, Achaea (except Pellene) and Arcadia, with the exception of Megalopolis, the staunchly anti-Spartan capital of Arcadia, which Agis III's forces besiege.", "Alexander of Epirus takes Heraclea from the Lucanians, and Terina and Sipontum from the Bruttii.", "Tarentum turn against Alexander of Epirus when they realize that he intends to create a kingdom of his own in southern Italy. Alexander is defeated and killed in the Battle of Pandosia on the banks of the Acheron.", "The Gallic tribe of the Senones and the Romans conclude a peace and enter upon a period of friendly relations which lasts the rest of the century."], "birth": []}, "-330": {"death": ["Darius III, king of Persia (murdered) (b. c. 380 BC)", "Agis III, Eurypontid king of Sparta (killed in battle)", "Parmenion (also Parmenio), Macedonian general (murdered) (b. c. 400 BC)", "Kidinnu, Chaldean astronomer and mathematician", "Theopompus of Chios, Greek historian and rhetorician (b. c. 380 BC)"], "event": ["January 20 \u2013 Alexander the Great defeats the Persians, led by satrap Ariobarzanes, at the Persian Gates. In this battle, Ariobarzan, supported by only 700 Persian Immortals, holds the vast Macedonian army of 17,000 men at bay for 30 days. At the end, his troops are surrounded by Alexander's army, because of a Persian shepherd, who leads it around the Persian defenses. However, instead of surrendering, Ariobarzan and his 700 Immortals fight to the last man. Some historians consider him to be the Leonidas of Persia.", "January 30 \u2013 After gaining the Pass of the Persian Gates, Alexander enters Persepolis. There he ceremonially burns down the palace of Xerxes I, as a symbol that the Panhellenic war of revenge is at an end.", "Before continuing his pursuit of Darius III, who has retreated into Bactria, Alexander assembles all the Persian treasure and entrusts it to Harpalus, who is to hold it at Ecbatana as chief treasurer. Parmenion is also left behind in Media to manage communications between Alexander and the rest of his rapidly growing lands.", "Alexander appoints Atropates as the satrap of Media while Mithrenes is appointed by Alexander as satrap of Armenia.", "Crossing the Elburz Mountains to the Caspian Sea, Alexander seizes Zadracarta in Hyrcania and receives the submission of a group of satraps and Persian notables, some of whom he confirms in their offices. He then travels westward and defeats the Mardi, a mountain people who inhabit the Elburz Mountains. He also accepts the surrender of Darius' Greek mercenaries.", "In Aria, Alexander's army defeats the satrap Satibarzanes, who initially offers to submit, only to later revolt. Alexander then founds the town of Alexandria of the Arians (modern Herat).", "At Phrada, in Drangiana, Philotas, Parmenion's son and commander of the elite Macedonian companion cavalry, is implicated in an alleged plot against Alexander's life. He is condemned by the army, and executed. A secret message is sent by Alexander to Cleander, Parmenion's second in command, who obediently kills Parmenion at Ecbatana in Media for fear that he would rise up in revolt at the news of his son's death. All Parmenio's adherents are now eliminated and men close to Alexander are promoted.", "July 17 \u2013 King Darius III is deposed and killed by Bessus, the satrap of Bactria. Bessus assumes the kingship as Artaxerxes IV.", "Alexander's regent in Macedonia, Antipater, makes peace with the Thracians (with whom he has been warring) and then marches south with a large force of over 40,000 men. He wins a hard-fought Battle of Megalopolis in Arcadia against Agis III of Sparta and his Greek mercenaries. Agis III is killed, and Spartan resistance is broken.", "Aeschines continues to try to prevent Demosthenes from being awarded a golden crown for his services to Athens. The case, which has begun in 336 BC, finally concludes with the overwhelming defeat of Aeschines, largely because of Demosthenes' brilliant speech for Ctesiphon (On the Crown).", "Following his defeat in the courts by Demosthenes, Aeschines leaves Athens for Rhodes, to teach rhetoric.", "The Italian cities of Fondi and Privernum, led by Vitruvius Vaccus, launch a failed revolt against Rome.", "Lysippos makes a bronze statue called The scraper (Apoxyomenos) (approximate date). A Roman copy after the original statue is today kept at Musei Vaticani in Rome."], "birth": []}, "-329": {"death": ["Bessus (Artaxerxes IV), Persian nobleman and satrap of Bactria, and later the last claimant to the Achaemenid throne of Persia"], "event": ["From Phrada, Alexander the Great presses on up the valley of the Helmand River, through Arachosia, and over the mountains past the site of modern Kabul into the country of the Paropamisade, where he founds Alexandria by the Caucasus.", "In Bactria, Bessus raises a national revolt in the eastern satrapies using the title of King Artaxerxes IV of Persia.", "Crossing the Hindu Kush northward, probably over the Khawak Pass,[1] Alexander brings his army, despite food shortages, to Drapsaka. Outflanked, Bessus flees beyond the Oxus river.", "Marching west to Bactra (Zariaspa), Alexander appoints Artabazus of Phrygia as the satrap of Bactria.", "Crossing the Oxus, Alexander sends his general Ptolemy in pursuit of Bessus. In the meantime, Bessus is overthrown by the Sogdian Spitamenes. Bessus is captured, flogged, and sent to Ptolemy in Bactria with the hope of appeasing Alexander. In due course, Bessus is publicly executed at Ecbatana. With the death of Bessus (Artaxerxes IV), Persian resistance to Alexander the Great ceases.", "From Maracanda, Alexander advances through Cyropolis to the Jaxartes river, the boundary of the Persian Empire. There he breaks the opposition of the Scythian nomads by his use of catapults and, after defeating them in a battle on the north bank of the river, pursues them into the interior. On the site of modern Khujand on the Jaxartes, he founds a city, Alexandria Eschate, \"the farthest.\""], "birth": []}, "-328": {"death": ["Clitus, lieutenant and friend of Alexander the Great (b. c. 375 BC)", "Spitamenes, Persian nobleman (b. 370 BC)"], "event": ["At Maracanda, Alexander murders Clitus, one of his most trusted commanders, friend and foster-brother, in a drunken quarrel; but his excessive display of remorse leads the army to pass a decree convicting Clitus posthumously of treason.", "Spitamenes raises all Sogdiana in revolt behind him, bringing in the Massagetae, a people of the Scythian confederacy. He besieges the Macedonian garrison in Maracanda. Alexander the Great sends an army under the command of Pharnuches of Lycia which is promptly annihilated with a loss of more than 2,000 infantry and 300 cavalry.", "Understanding now the danger represented by his enemy, Alexander moves personally to relieve Maracanda, only to learn that Spitamenes has left Sogdiana. Spitamenes then attacks Bactra, from where he is repulsed with great difficulty by the satrap of Bactria, Artabazus of Phrygia.", "Alexander attacks Oxyartes and the remaining Bactrian barons who are holding out in the hills of Paraetacene (modern Tajikistan). The Macedonians seize the crag on which Oxyartes has his stronghold (the Sogdian Rock), and among the captives is his daughter, Roxana. In the reconciliation that follows the battle, Alexander marries Roxana. The rest of Oxyartes' opponents are either won over or crushed.", "December \u2013 Spitamenes is badly defeated by Alexander's general Coenus. At this point Spitamenes' allies, feeling the situation desperate, kill their leader and send his head as a gift to Alexander."], "birth": []}, "-327": {"death": ["Callisthenes of Olynthus, Greek historian, great nephew and pupil of Aristotle (b. c. 360 BC)"], "event": ["Alexander the Great invades northern India. Recrossing the Hindu Kush, Alexander divides his forces. Half the army with the baggage under Hephaestion and Perdiccas, both cavalry commanders, are sent through the Khyber Pass, while Alexander leads the rest, together with his siege train, through the hills to the north. His advance through Swat and Gandhara is marked by the storming of the almost impregnable pinnacle of Aornos, a few miles west of the Indus.", "The relations between Alexander and Aristotle are embittered by the execution of Aristotle's nephew, the historian Callisthenes of Olynthus, who is charged with treason. Callisthenes has been accompanying Alexander to write a chronicle of the campaign.", "The Samnite army capture Neapolis (present-day Naples). The Romans, who are meanwhile moving south while the Samnites are occupied with Tarentum, take the opportunity to recover Neapolis and, after a long siege, evict the Samnite garrison from the city and make it an ally of Rome."], "birth": ["Heracles, illegitimate son of Alexander the Great by his mistress Barsine, daughter of satrap Artabazus of Phrygia and later claimant to the throne of Macedon (d. 309 BC)"]}, "-326": {"death": ["Coenus, son of Polemocrates and son-in-law of Parmenion and one of Alexander the Great's generals in his Persian and Indian expeditions"], "event": ["Spring \u2013 Alexander the Great crosses the Indus near Attock and enters Taxila, whose ruler, Taxiles (or Ambhi), furnishes 130 war elephants and troops in return for aid against his rival Porus, who rules the lands between the Hydaspes (modern Jhelum River) and the Acesines (modern Chenab River).", "On the left bank of the Hydaspes, Alexander fights his last great battle, the Battle of the Hydaspes River. He and his general Craterus defeat the Indian King Porus. Alexander founds two cities there, Alexandria on the Indus or Alexandria Nicaea (to celebrate his victory) and Alexandria Bucephalous or Bucephala (named after his horse Bucephalus, which dies there); and Porus becomes his ally.", "Philip, an officer in the service of Alexander the Great, is appointed satrap of India, including the provinces to the west of the Hydaspes, as far south as the junction of the Indus with the Acesines. Philip is put in charge by Alexander of building the city of Alexandria on the Indus.", "Alexander continues on to conquer all the headwaters of the Indus River. East of Porus' kingdom, near the Ganges River, Alexander faces the powerful empire of Magadha ruled by the Nanda dynasty. Fearing the prospects of facing another powerful Indian army and exhausted by years of campaigning, his army mutinies at the Hyphasis River (the modern Beas River) and refuses to march further east, thus making this river mark the eastern-most extent of Alexander's conquests.", "Following the mutiny of his army at the Hyphasis River, Alexander is persuaded by his army leaders to abandon his plans for invading the Ganges Valley. Alexander appoints Nearchus, a Cretan with naval experience, as admiral and places under his command all in the ranks of his army with any knowledge of seafaring. Nearchus has Indian shipwrights build 800 vessels, some as large as 300 tons, to take the army through Persian Gulf waters to Babylon. Alexander the Great begins the return march down the Indus to the sea.", "After the departure of Alexander from India, Philip is assassinated by some of the mercenary troops under his command. Alexander names Eudamus and Taxilas as replacement rulers of Philip's territories.", "Following their defeat by the Roman forces in Naples, the Samnites declare war on Rome starting the Second Samnite War. To help defeat the Samnites, the Romans make alliances with the peoples of Central Italy to the north of Samnium and with the Apulians to the southeast."], "birth": []}, "-325": {"death": [], "event": ["Alexander the Great leaves India and nominates his officer Peithon, son of Agenor, as the satrap of the region around the Indus.", "Alexander the Great orders his admiral, Nearchus, to sail from the Hydaspes River in western India to the Persian Gulf and up the Euphrates River to Babylon while Alexander's army starts marching through Gedrosia (Baluchistan).", "While returning to Persia, Alexander's army runs into the Malli clans (in modern day Multan). The ensuing battle severely weakens his army. Alexander sends much of his remaining army to Carmania (modern southern Iran) with his general Craterus, while he leads the rest of his forces back to Persia by the southern route through the Gedrosian Desert (now part of southern Iran and Makran in southern Pakistan).", "By the end of the year, Alexander's army reaches Persepolis, while his navy, under Nearchus, reaches Susa at around the same time.", "The first known reference to sugar cane appears in writings by Alexander the Great's admiral Nearchus, who writes of Indian reeds \"that produce honey, although there are no bees\".", "Agathocles, a rich and ambitious citizen of Syracuse, is exiled for attempting to overthrow the oligarchic party in the city.", "Going against his loyalty to the figurehead monarch of the Zhou Dynasty, the Qin ruler, Duke Huiwen, takes on the title of King Huiwen, claiming royal title and sparking a trend amongst other Warring States rulers to do the same.", "King Wuling ascends to the throne of Zhao.", "The fourth-century (Late Classical) period of sculpture ends in Ancient Greece and is succeeded by the Hellenistic period (approximate date).", "Aristotle writes Ta Ethika on virtue and moral character (approximate date)."], "birth": ["Euclid, Greek mathematician who will come to live in Alexandria (d. c. 275 BC)"]}, "-324": {"death": ["Hephaestion, son of Amyntor, a Macedonian general, soldier, aristocrat, and possibly lover of Alexander the Great (b. c. 356 BC)"], "event": ["On returning to Susa, Persia, Alexander the Great punishes those who he considers to have failed in their duties in his absence in India, particularly those who have plundered tombs and temples. Alexander continues his policy of replacing senior officials and executing defaulting governors. Over a third of his satraps are replaced and six are put to death. Three generals in Media, including Cleander, the brother of Coenus (who has died in 326 BC), are accused of extortion and are arrested, tried and executed.", "While at Susa, Alexander holds a feast to celebrate his capture of the Persian Empire.", "To further his policy of integrating the Macedonians and Persians, Alexander and 80 of his officers take Persian wives. He and Hephaestion marry Darius III's daughters Barsine (also called Stateira) and Drypteis, respectively, and 10,000 of his soldiers with native wives are given generous dowries. His determination to incorporate Persians on equal terms into his army and into the administration of the provinces is bitterly resented by the Macedonians.", "Alexander the Great spends the summer and autumn at the Median capital, Ecbatana, where his best friend, Hephaistion, dies during the autumn. Alexander indulges in extravagant mourning for his closest friend.", "Winter \u2013 Alexander carries out a savage punitive expedition against the Cossaeans in the hills of Luristan.", "Alexander the Great's treasurer, Harpalus, fearing arrest, flees from Susa to Athens. On arriving in Athens, he is imprisoned by the Athenians after a proposal of Demosthenes and Phocion, despite Hypereides' opposition, who wanted an immediate uprising against Alexander. Harpalus brings with him considerable wealth collected from the spoils of Alexander's conquest of Asia. This money is entrusted to a committee led by Demosthenes.", "Dinarchus, a professional speech writer in Athens, comes to prominence in the scandal that follows the flight to Athens of Alexander the Great's treasurer, Harpalus. When Harpalus escapes and flees to Crete, Dinarchus writes the prosecution speeches against Demosthenes, Demades, Aristogiton, Philocles and other well-known politicians accused of misappropriating some of this money.", "Demosthenes is convicted and imprisoned after being found guilty of misappropriating some of the funds that Alexander's treasurer, Harpalus, has brought with him. He escapes into exile, although his sentence is soon repealed. Although Hypereides has supported Demosthenes in his struggle against the Macedonians, that support is withdrawn after the Harpalus affair. After Demosthenes' exile, Hypereides becomes the head of the patriotic party in Athens.", "Greek colonists found the city of Akra Leuka (modern Alicante, Spain) on the Mediterranean coast of the Iberian peninsula."], "birth": ["Antiochus I Soter, King of the Seleucid dynasty (d. 261 BC)"]}, "-323": {"death": ["June 10 \u2013 Alexander the Great, king of Macedonia and conqueror of the Persian Empire (b. 356 BC)", "Diogenes of Sinope, Greek philosopher (b. c. 412 BC)", "Meleager, Macedonian general who has served with Alexander the Great", "Lycurgus, Athenian statesman and orator (b. c. 396 BC)"], "event": ["10 June/11 June \u2013 In Babylon, Alexander the Great dies, ten days after being taken ill after a prolonged banquet and drinking bout.", "The Partition of Babylon sets out the division of the territories conquered by Alexander the Great between his generals. The partition is a result of a compromise, essentially brokered by Eumenes, following a conflict of opinion between the party of Meleager, who wishes to give full power to Philip III (the illegitimate son of King Philip II of Macedon by Philinna of Larissa), and the party of Perdiccas, who wishes to wait for the birth of the heir of Alexander and his wife, Roxana (the future Alexander IV) to give him the throne under the control of a regent.", "Antipater in control of Macedonia and Greece (jointly with Alexander's chief lieutenant Craterus);", "Laomedon governing Syria and Phoenicia;", "Philotas looking after Cilicia;", "Peithon taking Media;", "Antigonus gaining the governorship of Pamphylia and Lycia;", "Leonnatus with Phrygia;", "Neoptolemus with Armenia;", "Ptolemy as governor of Egypt;", "Eumenes of Cardia as governor of Cappadocia and Paphlagonia; and", "Lysimachus becomes governor of Thrace.", "Taxiles and Porus are to rule over their kingdoms in India;", "Alexander's father-in-law Oxyartes rules Gandhara;", "Sibyrtius governs Arachosia and Gedrosia;", "Stasanor rules in Aria and Drangiana;", "Philip controls Bactria and Sogdiana;", "Phrataphernes rules Parthia and Hyrcania;", "Peucestas governs Persis;", "Tlepolemus is left in charge of Carmania;", "Atropates governs northern Media;", "Archon of Pella controls Babylonia; and", "Arcesilas rules northern Mesopotamia.", "Meleager and about 300 of his partisans are killed by forces loyal to Perdiccas. The first wife of Alexander, Roxana, arranges for Alexander's second wife, Stateira (Barsine), to be killed.", "Some of the northern Greek cities, including Athens, revolt against the Macedonian regent, Antipater, following the news of Alexander's death. Athens' actions are incited by the speeches of the Athenian general Leosthenes and the Athenian orator Hypereides. Joined by cities in central and northern Greece, the Athenians defeat Antipater in battle. They force him to take refuge in Lamia, where he is besieged for several months by the Greek allies.", "The Greek philosopher and scientist, Aristotle, faces a strong anti-Macedonian reaction in Athens following the death of Alexander the Great. Aristotle is accused of impiety by the Athenians. However, he escapes to Chalcis in Euboea.", "Theophrastus, who has been studying in Athens under Aristotle, becomes the head of the Lyceum, the academy in Athens founded by Aristotle, when Aristotle is forced to leave Athens.", "Following Alexander the Great's death, the Athenians recall Demosthenes from exile and provide the money to pay his fine."], "birth": ["Alexander IV of Macedon, son of Alexander the Great and Roxana (d. 309 BC)."]}, "-322": {"death": ["March 7 \u2013 Aristotle, Greek philosopher and scientist (b. 384 BC)", "October 12 \u2013 Demosthenes, Athenian statesman, recognized as the greatest of ancient Greek orators (b. 384 BC)", "Hypereides, Athenian orator (b. 390 BC)", "Leonnatus, Macedonian officer under Alexander the Great and one of the diadochi (b. 356 BC)", "Cleomenes of Naucratis, Greek deputy to the Macedonian ruler of Egypt, Ptolemy"], "event": ["In Babylon, the struggle for the succession to Alexander the Great develops. With Roxana giving birth to Alexander the Great's son, Alexander IV Aegus, a compromise is reached by the Macedonian generals so that he and Alexander the Great's young and dim-witted brother Philip III Arrhidaeus, are to be considered joint rulers. Perdiccas, regent and Macedonian commander in chief based in Babylon, tries to keep effective control with the assistance of Eumenes.", "Perdiccas breaks off his engagement with Nicaea, daughter of Antipater, because Alexander the Great's mother Olympias offers him the hand of Cleopatra, a sister of Alexander the Great.", "Perdiccas' most loyal supporter is Eumenes, governor of Cappadocia and Paphlagonia, which have not yet been conquered by the Macedonians. Antigonus (governor of Phrygia, Lycia and Pamphylia) refuses to undertake the task when Perdiccas orders him to do so. He is summoned by Perdiccas to Babylon to stand trial for his disobedience. In danger of his life he flees with his son Demetrius to Greece.", "Antigonus persuades Antipater and Craterus that Perdiccas must be destroyed. Thus Antipater and the Macedonian generals Antigonus, Lysimachus of Thrace, Craterus, Seleucus, and Ptolemy unite in opposing the claims of Perdiccas.", "Perdiccas conquers Cappadocia and installs Eumenes of Cardia as satrap.", "Peithon, the Macedonian satrap of Media, suppresses a rebellion of Macedonian veterans.", "The Athenians and their Greek allies' siege of the Macedonian ruler, Antipater, in Lamia is relieved by Leonnatus with an army of 20,000 infantry and 1,500 cavalry. Leonnatus is killed in the action.", "September 5 \u2013 Craterus arrives with a fleet to defeat the Athenians in the Battle of Crannon. This battle marks a complete victory for Antipater in the Lamian War.", "The Athenian orator and diplomat, Demades, regains his citizenship so that he and Phocion can negotiate a peace with Antipater, thus concluding the Lamian War. Before setting out he persuades the citizens of Athens to pass the death sentence upon Demosthenes and his followers (including Hypereides, leader of the Athenian patriotic party). Demades' embassy results in a peace disadvantageous to the Athenians, with the Athenians forced to accept the occupation of Athens' port, Piraeus, by the Macedonians.", "Demosthenes flees from the Macedonians who demand his surrender. Upon being arrested, he takes poison and dies.", "Hypereides flees to Aegina only to be captured by the Macedonians at the temple of Poseidon and put to death.", "The League of Corinth is dissolved.[1]", "By custom, kings in Macedonia assert their right to the throne by burying their predecessor. To pre-empt Perdiccas, the imperial regent, Ptolemy has Alexander the Great's body brought to Memphis, Egypt and buried there in a gold sarcophagus. Ptolemy then marries Alexander's mistress, Tha\u00efs and commences to reign as king of Egypt and the adjacent Libyan and Arabian regions.", "Ptolemy, taking advantage of internal disturbances, acquires the African Hellenic towns of Cyrenaica without the authority of Perdiccas.", "Ptolemy executes his deputy, Cleomenes of Naucratis, on the suspicion that Cleomenes favours Perdiccas. This action removes the chief check on his authority, and allows Ptolemy to obtain the sizable funds that Cleomenes has accumulated.", "Chandragupta Maurya becomes the first emperor of the Mauryan Dynasty as he overthrows the Nanda Dynasty."], "birth": []}, "-321": {"death": ["Craterus, Macedonian general (b. c. 370 BC)", "Perdiccas, Macedonian general and regent after the death of Alexander the Great (b. c. 365 BC)", "Zhou Xian Wang, King of the Zhou Dynasty of China"], "event": ["Antipater appoints Antigonus commander in chief of his army in Asia Minor and sends him with Craterus to fight against Eumenes, the satrap of Cappadocia and a supporter of Perdiccas.", "Leaving Eumenes to hold Asia Minor against Craterus and Antigonus, Perdiccas marches against Ptolemy, but when he fails to cross the Nile he is murdered by mutinous officers. Prominent among the mutineers is Seleucus. A truce is arranged, leaving Ptolemy in power in Egypt and Seleucus in power in Babylon.", "The key remaining generals (diadochi) of the late Alexander the Great agree to the Partition of Triparadisus (a town in northern Syria). This is a power-sharing agreement providing for a new regent to replace Perdiccas and it repartitions the satrapies of the empire that has been created by Alexander the Great. It follows but modifies the Partition of Babylon made two years earlier following the death of Alexander the Great. Under the agreement, Antipater becomes the regent of the Macedonian Empire on behalf of the two kings: the intellectually retarded Philip III Arrhidaeus and the infant Alexander IV of Macedon while Ptolemy is confirmed in possession of Egypt and Cyrene.", "Ptolemy further strengthens his position amongst the diadochi by marrying Eurydice, the third daughter of Antipater.", "Antigonus and Craterus defeat Eumenes in battle but Eumenes escapes. Antigonus and Craterus then besiege him unsuccessfully in the mountain fortress of Nora on the border between Cappadocia and Lycaonia. Craterus is killed during the fighting against Eumenes when his charging horse (Diodorus) falls over him.", "Continuing successes by Rome's armies against the Samnites forces the Samnites to sue for peace. However, the terms offered by Rome are so stringent that they are rejected by the Samnites and the war goes on.", "Two Roman consuls, Spurius Postumius Albinus and Titus Veturius Calvinus, leading an invading force into Samnium, are trapped in a mountain pass known as the Caudine Forks (Caudium) near Beneventum, where they can neither advance nor retire, and after a desperate struggle, they are forced to submit to the humiliating terms imposed by the Samnite victor, Gaius Pontius. The captured consuls pledge themselves to a five-year treaty on terms most favourable for the Samnites.", "Chandragupta Maurya, founder of the Mauryan empire, establishes himself as the king of Magadha."], "birth": []}, "-320": {"death": ["Anaximenes of Lampsacus, Greek rhetorician and historian", "Porus, Indian king spared by Alexander the Great (killed)", "Zoilus, Greek grammarian, cynic philosopher and literary critic from Amphipolis in Macedon (b. c. 400 BC)"], "event": ["Alexander the Great's various generals control different parts of Alexander's empire. Ptolemy controls Egypt, Seleucus controls Babylon and Syria, Antipater and his son Cassander control Macedon and Greece, Antigonus controls Phrygia and other parts of Asia Minor, Lysimachus controls Thrace and Pergamum and Eumenes controls the Cappadocia and Pontus areas.", "Judea and Syria are annexed by Ptolemy and he gives Judea a large measure of self-government.", "Eudemus makes himself master of the territories of the Indian king Porus, and treacherously puts that monarch to death.", "Zhou Shen Jing Wang becomes King of the Zhou Dynasty of China.", "Theophrastus begins the systematic study of botany.", "Alexandria in Macedonian Egypt becomes the largest city of the world, taking over the lead from Babylon in Macedonian Babylonia.[1]"], "birth": ["Timocharis of Alexandria, Greek astronomer responsible for the first recorded observation of Mercury and the first star catalogue (d. 260 BC)"]}, "-319": {"death": ["Antipater, Macedonian general, regent of Alexander the Great's empire (b. 397 BC)"], "event": ["The Athenian orator and diplomat, Demades, is sent to the Macedonian court, but either the Macedonian regent Antipater or his son Cassander, learning that Demades has intrigued with the former regent Perdiccas, puts him to death.", "Antipater becomes ill and dies shortly after, leaving the regency of the Macedonian Empire to the aged Polyperchon, passing over his son Cassander, a measure which gives rise to much confusion and ill-feeling.", "Polyperchon's authority is challenged by Antipater's son Cassander, who refuses to acknowledge the new regent. With the aid of Antigonus, ruler of Phrygia, and with the support of Ptolemy and Lysimachus, Cassander seizes Macedonia and most of Greece.", "Eumenes allies himself with the regent Polyperchon. He manages to escape from the siege of Nora, and his forces soon threaten Syria and Phoenicia. Polyperchon recognises Eumenes as the royal general in Asia Minor.", "Alexander the Great's widow, Roxana, joins Alexander's mother, Olympias, in Epirus."], "birth": ["Antigonus II Gonatas, Macedonian king (approximate date) (d. 239 BC)", "Pyrrhus of Epirus, King of the Molossians, Epirus and Macedonia (d. 272 BC)"]}, "-318": {"death": ["Phocion, Athenian statesman and general (b. c. 402 BC)"], "event": ["Antigonus resolves to become lord of all Asia, and in conjunction with Cassander and Ptolemy. He enters into negotiations with Eumenes; but Eumenes remains faithful to the royal house. He raises an army and forms a coalition with the satraps of the eastern provinces. He then captures Babylon from Antigonus.", "Antigonus marches against Eumenes, so Eumenes withdraws east to join the satraps of the provinces beyond the Tigris River.", "Cassander, who has allied himself with Ptolemy and Antigonus, declares war on the regent, Polyperchon. Most of the Greek states support him, including Athens. Cassander further effects an alliance with Eurydice, the ambitious wife of King Philip III Arrhidaeus of Macedon.", "Although Polyperchon is initially successful in securing control of the Greek cities, whose freedom he proclaims, his fleet is destroyed by Antigonus.", "In a power struggle in Athens after the death of Antipater, Phocion is deposed as the ruler of Athens, convicted of treason, and executed by those Athenians hoping to restore democracy to the city. Shortly afterward, the Athenians decree a public burial and a statue in his honour.", "The state of Qin moves into the Sichuan basin, giving them control of that great food-producing plain.", "Aristoxenus, a Greek peripatetic philosopher, and writer on music and rhythm, and a pupil of Aristotle, writes a treatise on music called the \"Elements of Harmony\"."], "birth": []}, "-317": {"death": ["King Philip III of Macedon (b. c. 359 BC)", "Queen Eurydice III of Macedon"], "event": ["Seleucus joins Antigonus against Eumenes and recaptures Babylon.", "Battle of Paraitacene: The first battle of Western armies each with an elephant corps who fights for control over Alexander's empire.", "Armenia's Persian satrap, Ardvates, frees his country from Macedonian control.", "After capturing Athens from Macedonia's regent Polyperchon, Cassander entrusts the government of Athens to the Athenian orator, statesman, and philosopher, Demetrius Phalereus.", "Polyperchon flees to Epirus, where he joins Alexander the Great's mother Olympias, Alexander's widow Roxana, and Alexander's infant son Alexander IV. He forms an alliance with Olympias, who is acting as regent for Alexander IV, and King Aeacides of Epirus.", "While Cassander is occupied in the Peloponnesus, Olympias leads an army into Macedonia. She is initially successful, defeating the army of King Philip III Arrhidaeus and captures King Philip and his wife, Eurydice, as well as Cassander's brother, Nicanor, and has them murdered.", "Ptolemy marries Berenice, lady-in-waiting to Eurydice, wife of Ptolemy.", "Acestorides, a native of Corinth, is made supreme commander by the citizens of Syracuse.", "After twice being banished for attempting to overthrow the oligarchical party, Agathocles returns with an army and banishes or murders about 10,000 citizens (including the oligarchs), and sets himself up as tyrant of Syracuse. Acestorides is banished from the city.", "Private funeral monuments are banned in Athenian cemeteries.", "Menander wins the first prize at the Lenaian festival with his play Dyskolos (The Grouch)."], "birth": []}, "-316": {"death": ["Olympias, Epirote princess, wife of Macedonian king Philip II and the mother of Alexander the Great (b. c. 376 BC)", "Eumenes, Greek general and diadochi (b. c. (362 BC)", "Sun Bin, Chinese military strategist and general from the State of Qi"], "event": ["Eumenes and Antigonus, rivals to Cassander for control of Macedonia, meet in the Battle of Gabiene in Media to the northeast of Susa. Antigonus defeats Eumenes, with the aid of Seleucus and Peithon (the satraps of Babylonia and Media, respectively). The result is inconclusive. However, some of Eumenes' soldiers take matters into their own hands. Learning that Antigonus has captured many of their wives, children and the cumulative plunder of nearly 40 years of continuous warfare, they secretly open negotiations with Antigonus for their safe return. They hand over Eumenes and his senior officers to Antigonus in return for their baggage and families. Eumenes is put to death by Antigonus after a week's captivity.", "Cassander returns from the Peloponnesus and defeats Macedonia's regent Polyperchon in battle. Cassander blockades Olympias, mother of the late Alexander the Great, in Pydna, where she surrenders. Cassander takes Roxana and his son Alexander IV of Macedon into his custody.", "Olympias is condemned to death by Cassander, but his soldiers refuse to carry out the sentence. She is eventually killed by relatives of those she has previously had executed.", "Cassander marries Thessaloniki, half sister of Alexander. He has Alexander's widow, Roxana and son, Alexander IV of Macedon, imprisoned at Amphipolis in Thrace. They are never to be seen alive again.", "Thebes, which has been destroyed by Alexander the Great, begins to get rebuilt by Cassander with the help of the citizens of Athens.", "Agathocles, the new tyrant of Syracuse, extends his rule over most of the island.", "The Romans, with an eye to capturing Apulia, send an army (led by dictator Quintus Fabius Maximus Rullianus) to seize the town of Luceria from the Samnites. They are badly beaten in the Battle of Lautulae and the Samnites go on to reach within 32 kilometres of Rome.", "King Hui of Qin decides on the advice of General Sima Cuo to invade and annex the ancient states of Ba and Shu in Sichuan to increase Qin's agricultural output and obtain a strategic platform to defeat the state of Chu."], "birth": ["Arsinoe II, Queen of Thrace and later co-ruler of Egypt with her brother and husband Ptolemy II of Egypt (d. 270 BC)"]}, "-315": {"death": ["Zhou Shen Jing Wang, King of the Zhou Dynasty of China"], "event": ["Antigonus claims authority over most of Asia, seizes the treasury at Susa and enters Babylon, where Seleucus is governor. Seleucus flees to Ptolemy in Egypt and enters into a league with him, Lysimachus (the ruler of Thrace) and Cassander against Antigonus. This leads to the First Coalition War.", "Peithon consolidates his power base in the eastern part of the Empire.", "Polyperchon flees to the Peloponnesus, where he still controls a few strong points, and allies himself with Antigonus, who has by now fallen out with his former allies.", "Antigonus drives out Cassander's Macedonian forces of occupation from the Greek islands and forms the island cities in the Aegean into the \"League of the Islanders\", preparatory to his invasion of Greece. His ally, the city of Rhodes, furnishes him with the necessary fleet.", "The King of Epirus, Aeacides, faces a revolt from his people and they drive him from the kingdom. His son, Phyrrhus, who is then only two years old, is saved from being killed by some faithful servants. Cassander takes control of Epirus.", "The Macedonian port city of Thessaloniki is founded by Cassander and named after his wife Thessalonike.", "Ptolemy's armies fight supporters of Antigonus in Cyprus. Ptolemy is able to re-conquer the island.", "Agathocles, the tyrant of Syracuse, seizes the city of Messina.", "In the historical novel Funeral Games by Mary Renault, Cassander visits the Lyceum in Athens and tells Theophrastos evil slanderous lies against Alexander the Great."], "birth": ["Aratus, Macedonian Greek mathematician, astronomer, meteorologist, botanist and poet (d. 240 BC)"]}, "-314": {"death": ["Xenocrates, Greek philosopher, pupil of Plato and head of the Greek Academy (b. 396 BC)", "Aeschines, Athenian orator and politician (b. 389 BC)"], "event": ["Antigonus, the ruler of the Asian parts of the late Alexander the Great's empire, faces a coalition consisting of Cassander, the Macedonian regent; Lysimachus, the satrap of Thrace; and Ptolemy, the satrap of Egypt, who has taken the side of the ousted satrap of Babylon, Seleucus.", "Antigonus does not trust Peithon's growing power. So Antigonus tricks Peithon to come to his court, where Antigonus has him executed.", "Antigonus invades Syria, then under Ptolemy's control, and besieges and captures Tyre. Antigonus then occupies Syria, proclaiming himself regent.", "As Cassander fights to retain control over central Greece, Antigonus promises freedom to the Greek cities in a bid to gain support from them against Cassander. The Aetolians enter into an alliance with Antigonus. Cassander marches against them with his allies Lysimachus, Ptolemy and Seleucus and destroys the city of Agrinion.", "Success seems to be going the Samnites' way in their ongoing battles against the Romans. Campania is on the verge of deserting Rome. Peace is established between Rome and some Samnite towns.", "Zhou Nan Wang becomes King of the Zhou Dynasty of China.", "The city of Guilin is founded by the Qin Dynasty."], "birth": []}, "-313": {"death": ["Aeacides, King of Epirus"], "event": ["Ptolemy, whose Egyptian kingdom includes Cyprus, puts down a revolt there. A revolt in Cyrene is also crushed.", "Becoming tired of the Macedonian rule, the people of Epirus recall their former king Aeacides. Cassander immediately sends an army against him under his brother, Philip, who is diverted from invading Aetolia.", "Philip defeats Aeacides in a battle. Aeacides, with the remnant of his forces, joins the Aetolians. A second battle takes place, in which Philip is again victorious, and Aeacides is killed. The remaining Aetolian army takes refuge in the surrounding mountains."], "birth": []}, "-312": {"death": [], "event": ["Ptolemy and Seleucus, the satrap of Babylonia, invade the satrapy of Syria. The resulting Battle of Gaza leads to a triumph for Ptolemy and Seleucus over Antigonus' son, Demetrius Poliorcetes (\"sieger of cities\"), who is captured but immediately released. Seleucus ceases his service to Ptolemy and returns to his former province, Babylonia. This event takes place on October 1 and becomes the starting point of the Seleucid era.", "The Syracusans ask for help against their tyrant Agathocles from the Carthaginians, who, fearing for their own possessions in Sicily, send a large force to the island.", "The Roman censor, Appius Claudius Caecus, a patrician, enters office and begins construction of the Appian Way (the Via Appia) between Rome and Capua. He also embarks on a program of political reform, including the distribution of the landless citizens of Rome among the tribes, which at this time constitute basic political units. Appius also admits sons of freedmen into the Roman Senate. He also asserts the right of freed slaves to hold office.", "Rome gets its first pure drinking water as engineers complete the first aqueduct into the city, the Aqua Appia."], "birth": []}, "-311": {"death": [], "event": ["Seleucus reestablishes himself as satrap of Babylonia and asserts control over Media and Susiana (Elam).", "Ptolemy tries to occupy Syria. However, Demetrius Poliorcetes wins a battle over Ptolemy's forces and Antigonus enters Syria in force. So, after only a few months, Ptolemy evacuates his forces from Syria.", "In view of the threat by Seleucus to his control of the East, Antigonus decides to make peace with all of his adversaries, except Seleucus, who now holds Babylon. All of the diadochi confirm the existing boundaries and the freedom of the Greek cities. Ptolemy and Lysimachus are confirmed as satraps of Egypt and Thrace, respectively, and Antigonus and Cassander are confirmed as commanders of the army in Asia and Europe. Antigonus, no longer regent but now titled the strategos (officer in charge) of the whole of Asia, rules in Syria from the Hellespont to the Euphrates, including Asia Minor.", "It is agreed by all parties that the young king Alexander IV of Macedon, son of Alexander the Great, will become king of the whole empire when he comes of age in six years' time.", "The peace agreement between the diadochi is soon violated. On the pretext that garrisons have been placed in some of the free Greek cities by Antigonus, Ptolemy and Cassander renew hostilities against him.", "The Carthaginian general Hamilcar crosses the Mediterranean with an army and wins Battle of Himera against the tyrant of Syracuse, Agathocles' forces. Agathocles is then besieged in Syracuse."], "birth": []}, "-310": {"death": ["Pytheas, Greek merchant, geographer and explorer from the Greek colony Massilia (today Marseille) (b. c. 380 BC)"], "event": ["Antigonus orders Nicanor, one of his generals, to invade Babylonia from the east and his son Demetrius Poliorcetes to attack it from the west. Nicanor assembles a large force but it is surprised and defeated by Seleucus at the river Tigris, and his troops are either cut to pieces or defect to the enemy. Similarly, Demetrius Poliorcetes fails to oust Seleucus.", "Ptolemy attacks Cilicia, territory held by Antigonus.", "The cities of Antigonia Troas (later known as Alexandria Troas) and Antigoneia (later known as Nicaea) are founded by Antigonus I Monophthalmus.", "The tyrant of Syracuse Agathocles escapes from the siege of the city by the Carthaginians and carries the war with the Carthaginians back into his enemy's territory.", "Rome deals with renewed trouble from the Etruscans, who are persuaded by the Samnites to cease their alliance with the Romans. In the Battle of Lake Vadimo, the Romans under Fabius Maximus Rullianus defeat the Etruscans.", "The Autariatae disappear due to Celtic migrations."], "birth": ["Aristarchus of Samos, Greek astronomer and mathematician (approximate date) (d. c. 230 BC)", "Xun Zi, Chinese philosopher (approximate date)"]}, "-309": {"death": ["Roxana, wife of Alexander the Great, and mother of Alexander IV of Macedon", "King Alexander IV of Macedon (b. 323 BC)", "Heracles, illegitimate son of Alexander the Great and claimant to the throne of Macedon (b. 327 BC)", "Cleomenes II, King of Sparta", "Zhang Yi, strategist of the Chinese state of Qin"], "event": ["Ptolemy personally commands a fleet that captures the coastal regions of Lycia and Caria from Antigonus.", "Cassander, who has held Roxana, widow of Alexander the Great, in prison for a number of years, has her put to death along with her young son Alexander Aegus, the nominal King Alexander IV of Macedon.", "Antigonus attempts to renew his alliance with the Macedonian general and former regent Polyperchon, who still controls part of the Peloponnesus. He sends Heracles, the illegitimate son of Alexander the Great, to Polyperchon to be treated as a pretender to the throne of Macedonia.", "Polyperchon manages to form an army consisting of 20,000 infantry and 1,000 cavalry and challenges Cassander's army. Instead of fighting, Cassander starts negotiations with Polyperchon. By offering to make him a general of his own army and placing him as governor of Peloponnesus, he convinces Polyperchon to change allegiance to him instead of Heracles. As a result Polyperchon murders Heracles and his mother Barsine.", "Areus I succeeds his grandfather Cleomenes II as king of Sparta.", "A census is carried out in Athens. 21,000 citizens, 10,000 foreign residents and 400,000 others \u2013 women, children and slaves \u2013 are living in the city.", "Since 480 BC, an aristocratic Council of Elders has effectively ruled Carthage. The titular king of Carthage, Bomilcar, attempts a coup to restore the monarchy to full power. His attempt fails, which leads to Carthage becoming in name as well as in fact a republic.", "Leaving his brother Antander to continue the defence of Syracuse, Agathocles lands in North Africa with the aim of distracting the Carthaginians from their siege of Syracuse. Agathocles concludes a treaty with Ophellas, ruler of Cyrenaica. He then takes advantage of the civil unrest in Carthage and nearly succeeds in conquering the city.", "The Samnites again rise against Rome. Lucius Papirius Cursor is appointed dictator for the second time and wins a great victory at Longula over the Samnites.", "Soon after the State of Qin has conquered the State of Shu (in modern-day Sichuan province), they employ the Shu engineer Bi Ling to create the Guanxian irrigation system, which will eventually provide for over five million people in an area of 40 to 50 square miles (130\u00a0km2), still in use today."], "birth": ["Ptolemy II Philadelphus, King of Egypt (d. 246 BC)"]}, "-308": {"death": ["Cleopatra of Macedon, sister of Alexander the Great and daughter of King Philip II of Macedon and Olympias (b. c. 356 BC)"], "event": ["Ptolemy crosses from Asia Minor into Greece, where he takes possession of Corinth, Sicyon and Megara.", "The Second Samnite War escalates when the tribes of the central Apennines, the Umbrians, Picentini, and Marsians join the war against Rome. However, Rome is able to control the uprising.", "The Etruscans sue for peace with Rome, which is granted by the Romans on severe terms."], "birth": []}, "-307": {"death": [], "event": ["Antigonus makes peace with Seleucus, who is left free to consolidate his kingdom.", "Ptolemy founds the Museum and Library of Alexandria with the help of Demetrius Phalereus. Like Alexander the Great, Ptolemy has studied under Aristotle and staffs the museum with some 100 professors paid by the state.", "The governor (despot) of Athens for 10 years and supporter of Cassander, Demetrius Phalereus, is obliged to flee from Athens on the approach of the Macedonian prince, Demetrius Poliorcetes. Demetrius Phalereus settles in Alexandria in Egypt.", "Demetrius Poliorcetes re-establishes the old Athenian constitution. The grateful Athenians honour Antigonus and Demetrius as divine saviours (theoi soteres).", "Upon becoming ruler of Epirus, Phyrrhus allies himself with his brother-in-law, Demetrius Poliorcetes, son of Antigonus.", "The tyrant of Syracuse, Agathocles is forced to return to Syracuse to deal with growing unrest in his Sicilian dominions. Those of Agathocles' army that remain behind in Carthage are soon destroyed.", "The Carthaginian general Hamilcar fails to take Syracuse and is captured and killed.", "The city of Segesta in Sicily is destroyed by Agathocles.", "The Chinese King Wuling of Zhao reforms the military of the State of Zhao by putting more emphasis on cavalry over charioteers.", "Epicureanism, a system of philosophy based upon the teachings of Epicurus, is founded (approximate date)."], "birth": []}, "-306": {"death": [], "event": ["Menelaus, brother of Egypt's ruler, Ptolemy I Soter, is defeated and captured by Demetrius Poliorcetes in the Battle of Salamis, a naval battle off Cyprus. The battle is a complete victory for Demetrius and results in his capture of Cyprus from Ptolemy and it completely destroys the naval power of Egypt. This gives Demetrius Poliorcetes' father, Antigonus I Monophthalmus, control of the Aegean, the eastern Mediterranean, and all of the Middle East except Babylonia.", "With Antigonus and Demetrius now each assuming the title of king, Ptolemy, as well as Cassander, Lysimachus and Seleucus I Nicator, respond by doing the same.", "Antigonus proclaims himself king of Asia Minor and northern Syria thus commencing the Antigonid dynasty. Antigonus appoints Demetrius Poliorcetes king and co-regent.", "A peace agreement is reached between Syracuse and Carthage. The peace restricts Carthaginian power in Sicily to the area west of the Halycus (Platani) River. This agreement allows the tyrant of Syracuse, Agathocles, to strengthen his rule over the Greek cities of Sicily.", "Antigonus tries to follow up his victory in Cyprus by invading Egypt with a large army and a formidable fleet. But Ptolemy successfully holds the frontier against him. However, the year's events mean that Ptolemy no longer engages in overseas expeditions against Antigonus.", "A four-drachma coin, picturing Alexander the Great, is issued by Lysimachos from this time until 281 BC. At least one of them is now preserved at the British Museum in London."], "birth": []}, "-305": {"death": [], "event": ["Seleucus establishes Seleucia on the Tigris River as his capital.", "Antigonus I Monophthalmus sends his son Demetrius to conquer Rhodes, which has refused him armed support against Ptolemy. He shows ingenuity in devising new siege engines in his unsuccessful attempt to reduce the city. Among his creations are a battering ram 60 metres long and requiring 1,000 men to operate it and a wheeled siege tower named \"Helepolis\" (or \"Taker of Cities\") which stands 40 metres tall and 20 metres wide and weighs 180 tons. This siege of Rhodes earns Demetrius the title Poliorcetes (\"the City Besieger\").", "The Roman consuls, Marcus Fulvius Curvus Paetinus and Lucius Postumius Megellus, decisively defeat the Samnites in the Battle of Bovianum to end the Second Samnite War."], "birth": ["Zou Yan, Chinese philosopher (d. 240 BC)"]}, "-304": {"death": [], "event": ["The siege of Rhodes ends after a year as Demetrius Poliorcetes meets with obstinate resistance from the citizens of Rhodes who are supported by Ptolemy (thereby earning Ptolemy the title of Soter (Saviour)). Antigonus then concludes a peace treaty and an alliance with the island state, guaranteeing it autonomy and neutrality in his conflicts with Ptolemy.[1]", "Cassander invades Attica and besieges Athens. Demetrius Poliorcetes drives Cassander out of central Greece and liberates Athens. In return, the Athenians bestow on him a new religious honour, synnaos (\"having the same temple\") of the temple of the goddess Athena.", "The second Samnite war formally ends with a peace agreement in which the Samnites obtain peace on terms that are severe but not as crushing as those agreed by the Romans with the Etruscans four years earlier. Under the peace, Rome gains no territory, but the Samnites renounce their hegemony over Campania. Rome is also successful in ending the revolts amongst the tribes surrounding Roman territory.[1]", "The tyrant Agathocles takes on the title of King of Sicily. He extends his influence into southern Italy and the Adriatic.", "The Mauryan emperor Chandragupta defeats Seleucos I as he tries to invade India."], "birth": ["Ashoka the Great, Indian emperor and ruler of the Maurya Empire in present-day eastern India 273\u2013232 BC (d. 232 BC)"]}, "-303": {"death": [], "event": ["Seleucus I Nicator expands his kingdom throughout Persia as far east as India, but his advance is eventually halted by Chandragupta Maurya, the founder of the Maurya dynasty of India. In a pact concluded by the two leaders, Seleucus agrees to territorial concessions in exchange for 500 war-trained elephants .", "Seleucus refounds the town of Orrhoa in northern Mesopotamia as a military colony and mixes Greek settlers with its eastern population. He names Edessa in memory of the ancient capital of Macedon.", "Cassander and Lysimachus persuade Seleucus and Ptolemy to join them in trying to destroy Antigonus.", "Demetrius Poliorcetes occupies Corinth, Sicyon, and Argos in the Peloponnese, and Achaea, Elis and almost all of Arcadia join his side.", "The citizens of Tarentum seek the help of the Spartan general, Cleonymus. He is able to pacify the Lucanians with the agreement of the Romans."], "birth": []}, "-302": {"death": [], "event": ["Following their agreement to work together to defeat Antigonus, Seleucus invades Asia Minor from Babylonia, while Ptolemy attacks Syria and Lysimachus moves into the western part of Asia Minor.", "Docimus, the regent of Phrygia, and Phoenix, the strategos of Lycia, desert Antigonus.", "The Macedonian general, Philetaerus, moves his allegiance from Antigonus to Antigonus' rival, Lysimachus. In return, Lysimachus makes Philetaerus guardian of the fortress of Pergamum with its treasure of some 9,000 talents.", "Antigonus' son Demetrius Poliorcetes attacks Cassander's forces in Thessaly. Cassander loses his possessions south of Thessaly to Demetrius. Antigonus and Demetrius crown their success by renewing the pan-Hellenic league. Ambassadors from all the Hellenic states (with the exception of Sparta, Messenia and Thessaly) meet at Corinth to elect Antigonus and Demetrius protectors of the new league.", "As Antigonus is finding his enemies closing in on him, a truce is made and the gains by Demetrius have to be abandoned. Demetrius reaches Ephesus to support his father.", "Pyrrhus is dethroned as King of Epirus by an uprising and joins Demetrius while in exile."], "birth": []}, "-301": {"death": ["Antigonus I Monophthalmus, Macedonian general under Alexander the Great who founded and became the first king of the Macedonian dynasty of the Antigonids (b. 382 BC)"], "event": ["In the Battle of Ipsus in Phrygia, the armies of Antigonus, the ruler of Syria, Asia Minor, Phoenicia and Judea, and his son Demetrius Poliorcetes are defeated by the forces of Lysimachus and Seleucus. Antigonus is killed in the battle.[1]", "Antigonus' defeat and death secures Cassander control of Macedonia. Through this victory, Lysimachus is able to add the greater part of Asia Minor to his European possessions while Seleucus now controls most of Syria. However, Demetrius is able to keep a foothold in Greece.[1]", "The southern part of Syria is occupied by Ptolemy."], "birth": []}, "-300": {"death": [], "event": ["Pilgrims travel to the healing temples of Asclepieion to be cured of their ills. After a ritual purification the followers bring offerings or sacrifices.", "Pyrrhus, the King of Epirus, is taken as a hostage to Egypt after the Battle of Ipsus and makes a diplomatic marriage with the princess Antigone, daughter of Ptolemy and Berenice.", "Ptolemy concludes an alliance with King Lysimachus of Thrace and gives him his daughter Arsinoe II in marriage.", "Seleucus founds the city of Antioch, some 20 miles up the Orontes River, naming it after his father.", "After the death of his wife Apama, Seleucus marries Stratonice, daughter of Demetrius Poliorcetes.", "The central texts of Jainism, the Jain scriptures, are recorded (approximate date).[citation needed]", "In Pella (in Macedonia), the artist Gnosis makes a mosaic floor decoration called Stag Hunt and even signs it with \"Gnosis made it\". It is today preserved at the Archaeological museum in Pella."], "birth": []}}